Comments & Questions

In this section, we aim to provide the reader with an array of perspectives on the text, as well as questions that challenge those perspectives. The commentary has been culled from sources as diverse as reviews contemporaneous with the work, letters written by the author, literary criticism of later generations, and appreciations written throughout the work’s history. Following the commentary, a series of questions seeks to filter H. G. Wells’s The War of the Worlds through a variety of points of view and bring about a richer understanding of this enduring work.

Comments

THE TIMES OF LONDON

The sorrows caused to England, and especially to a suburban district, by an invasion of mailed beings from Mars (very unlike Mr. du Maurier’s “Martian”) are the theme of The War of the Worlds. Mr. Wells combines the “Battle of Dorking,” in realism, with scientific fantasy. The fantasy is ingenious, nay, exceedingly ingenious, but there is a want of human interest in these gigantic, mail-clad, sexless, telepathic invaders. Suppose yourself at home with them, in Mars, and you will not find them good company. We might live a more interesting life with Victor Hugo’s pieuvre, comparatively a domestic animal. It is unnecessary, and, indeed, within the limits of space, impossible to give an idea of Martians as understood by Mr. Wells, but a very large, round, ruthless cuttlefish, with a genius for scientific inventions and applied mechanics, comes, perhaps, as near a Martian as a brief phrase will allow. Their ravages permit free contrast of the commonplace with the gruesome, and of these contrasts the book is made.

—April 18, 1898





THE NATION


As is well known, the scientifically gruesome is Mr. Wells’s forte. In his “Thirty Strange Stories” we supped on thirty kinds of horror, each course a brief one. But in the ‘War of the Worlds,’ which is a novel, we are sated with one long banquet of horrors. The usual miseries of war are not enough; a hundred new ones are invented to suit the invented inhabitants of another and a more highly civilized world. The men of “vast, cool, and unsympathetic intellects,” who are all brain and hand, smiting the heat-rays, and choking out life with tubes of liquid black smoke, make mere powder and shell household pets by comparison. To read this story of the emptying of London and the wasting of the Surrey by the loathsome Martians—for they are repulsive as well as fearful—is to quake by day and sink into nightmare after. Such tribute as this is certainly not to be denied it. The whole conception is highly ingenious, and the deliverance at last, although a fresh horror in itself, is unexpected cheer. That the accursed bacteria of disease and putrefaction should come to man’s rescue and stay the Martians (who, having no bacteria in their otherwise happy home, have developed no resisting power against them as we have) is an untying worthy of Mr. Wells’s genius. Under his accustomed skill of treatment the whole is entirely convincing, but we acknowledge that we prefer terror in smaller prescriptions. We suspect, however, that Mr. Wells thinks it nothing, as Mr. Thoreau says, to go round the world to count the cats in Zanzibar, and that he is not likely to be restrained from ever bolder flights of his weird fancy, to ever stranger places, whither perforce his spellbound readers must follow.

—June 9, 1898





JOSEPH CONRAD


I suppose you’ll have the common decency to believe me when I tell you I am always powerfully impressed by your work. Impressed is the word, 0 Realist of the Fantastic! whether you like it or not. And if you want to know what impresses me it is to see how you contrive to give over humanity into the clutches of the Impossible and yet manage to keep it down (or up) to its humanity, its flesh, blood, sorrow, folly. That is the achievement!

—from a letter to Wells (December 4, 1898)



WILLIAM L. ALDEN

We owe Mr. Wells a debt of gratitude for having blocked the path of the dozens of men who would certainly have written stories of the general character of the “War of the Worlds” if he had not forestalled them and made imitation preposterous.

—from the New York Times (March 25, 1899)



H. G. WELLS

I had rather be called a journalist than an artist.

—from a letter to Henry James (July 8, 1915)





WILLIAM ARCHER


Is not Mr. Wells the great Adventurer of latter-day literature? No quest is too perilous for him, no forlorn-hope too daring. He led the first explorers to the moon. He it was who lured the Martians to earth and exterminated them with microbes. He has ensnared an angel from the skies and expiscated a mermaid from the deep. He has mounted a Time Machine (of his own invention) and gone careening down the vistas of the Future.

—from God and Mr. Wells ( 1917)





CONRAD AIKEN


The critics have been right. For as one looks back over Mr. Wells’s long and honourable record as a novelist one fails to recall a single vivid or credible character. They are all alike—and all alike in being rather colourless automata, mere puppets by which their manipulator has sought to demonstrate his successive attitudes toward a changing world.

—from the Atlantic Monthly (November 1926)



E. M. FORSTER

All Wells’s characters are as flat as a photograph. But the photographs are agitated with such vigour that we forget their complexities lie on the surface and would disappear if it was scratched or curled up.

—from Aspects of the Novel (1927) Questions

1. According to Alfred Mac Adam, “Within Wells’s personal interpretation of evolution, the Martians are what humans will be thousands of centuries into the future.” If that is so, the novel depicts humanity’s future destroying its present. Was Wells right about what was happening in his own time? Is it true now that what we are becoming is destroying what we are? Is the process one to lament or cheer on?

2. Would modern Americans act like Wells’s English people in the face of such an attack, or would they react differently?

3. What objections would you make to the Artilleryman’s speech beginning “Life is real again...” (see p. 177).

4. Consider countries you know of that have recently been devastated by an external enemy. Have they become better, more unified, less decadent, more progressive? Compare your observations with Wells’s remarks in his Epilogue (p. 199).





