ACTIVITIES While Reading

Read Chapter 1, and put these sentences in the right order.

1 Alice found a small key and unlocked a very small door. 2 Alice fell down a rabbit-hole. 3 Alice drank something from a bottle and got very small. 4 Alice ate a small cake, which said, 'EAT ME'. 5 Alice saw a White Rabbit and ran after him. 6 Alice tried to climb up a table leg to get the key again.

Before you read Chapter 2, can you guess what will happen? Choose one ending for this sentence.

When Alice has finished eating the cake, she will ... a) be ill. b) get smaller. c) get bigger. d) wake up.

Read Chapter 2. Here are some untrue sentences about it. Change them into true sentences.

1 Alice was soon as small as a mouse. 2 The Duchess dropped her gloves and fan. 3 The fan made Alice get bigger. 4 Alice fell into the sea. 5 While she was swimming, Alice met a cat. 6 Alice suddenly found herself outside in a garden.



45 ACTIVITIES: While Reading Read Chapter 3. Choose the best question-word for these questions, and then answer them.

What! Why 1 ... did the Caterpillar tell Alice to do? 2 ... couldn't Alice explain herself? 3 ... did the Caterpillar call Alice back? 4 ... did Alice have to eat if she wanted to get bigger? 5 ... did the bird call Alice? 6 ... didn't Alice answer the question about stealing eggs? Read Chapters 4 and 5. Choose the best words to complete this summary of the chapters.

When Alice went into the Duchess's kitchen I bedroom, there was a cat which was screaming I grinning, and a baby who was screaming I grinning. The Duchess gave I took the baby from I to Alice, but the baby was I turned into a pig. After that Alice had I spoke a conversation with the Cheshire Cat and they talked to I about mad people.

At the tea-party the March Hare said, 'Have some coffee I tea,' but there wasn't some I any. Later, he said to Alice, 'You must mean I say what you mean I say.' The Hatter had a watch which showed I didn't show the time because it was always I never six o'clock there. The tea­party always I never finished, and they just went on moving I moved round the table. Alice thought it was a very clever I stupid tea-party and went away.



46 ACTIVITIES: While Reading Before you read Chapter 6 (The Queen's game of croquet), can you guess what happens? Tick one box each time.



YES NO 1 Alice wins the game of croquet. □ □ 2 The Queen wants to cut lots of heads off. □ □ 3 Alice meets some more strange animals. □ □ 4 When the game finishes, Alice wakes up. □ □ Read Chapters 6 and 7. Match these halves of sentences.

1 The croquet game was very strange .. .

2 The Queen of Hearts got very angry .. .

3 Then Alice saw her friend the Cheshire Cat, ...

4 The King didn't like the Cat's head ...

5 But the executioner couldn't cut off a head ...

6 After the croquet there was a jury trial to find out ...

7 While the Hatter was giving his evidence, ...

8 At the end Alice began to argue with the Queen, ...

9 but only its head appeared, not its body. 10 and then she woke up. 11 because everybody had to use flamingoes for mallets. 12 who stole the tarts made by the Queen of Hearts. 13 and wanted to cut it off. 14 Alice was getting bigger and taller. 15 and sent nearly everybody to prison. 16 if there wasn't a body to cut it off from.





