ABOUT BOOKWORMS

OXFORD BOOKWORMS LIBRARY Classics• True Stories• Fantasy & Horror• Human Interest Crime & Mystery • Thriller & Adventure The OXFORD BOOKWORMS LIBRARY offers a wide range of original and adapted stories, both classic and modern, which take learners from elementary to advanced level through six carefully graded language stages: Stage 1 (400 headwords) Stage 4 (1400 headwords)



Stage 2 (700 headwords) Stage 5 (1800 headwords)



Stage 3 (1000 headwords) Stage 6 (2500 headwords)

More than fifty titles are also available on cassette, and there are many titles at Stages 1 to 4 which are specially recommended for younger learners. In addition to the introductions and activities in each Bookworm, resource material includes photocopiable test worksheets and Teacher's Handbooks, which contain advice on running a class library and using cassettes, and the answers for the activities in the books.

Several other series are linked to the OXFORD BOOKWORMS LIBRARY. They range from highly illustrated readers for young learners, to playscripts, non-fiction readers, and unsimplified texts for advanced learners.

Oxford Bookworms Starters Oxford Bookworms Factfiles Oxford Bookworms Playscripts Oxford Bookworms Collection Details of these series and a full list of all titles in the OXFORD BOOKWORMS LIBRARY can be found in the Oxford English catalogues. A selection of titles from the OXFORD BOOKWORMS LIBRARY can be found on the next pages.



53 BOOKWORMS• FANTASY & HORROR• STAGE 2 Five Children and It EDITH NESBIT Retold by Diane Mowat When the children dug a hole in the gravel-pit, they were very surprised at what they found. “It” was a Psammead, a sand-fairy, thousands of years old.

It was a strange little thing - fat and furry, and with eyes on long stalks. It was often very cross and unfriendly, but it could give wishes - one wish a day. “How wonderful!” the children said.

But wishes are difficult things. They can get you into trouble ...



BOOKWORMS • CLASSICS • ST AGE 2 The Jungle Book RUDYARD KIPLING Retold by Ralph Mowat In the jungle of Southern India the Seeonee Wolf-Pack has a new cub. He is not a wolf- he is Mowgli, a human child, but he knows nothing of the world of men. He lives and hunts with his brothers the wolves. Baloo the bear and Bagheera the panther are his friends and teachers. And Shere Khan, the man-eating tiger, is his enemy.

Kipling's famous story of Mowgli's adventures in the jungle has been loved by young and old for more than a hundred years.



BOOKWORMS• HUMAN INTEREST• STAGE 2

A Stranger at Green Knowe

LUCY M. BOSTON

Retold by Diane Mowat

When Ping sees Hanno in the zoo, he is excited, but also unhappy. Hanno is a magnificent African gorilla, big and black and much stronger than a man. But how can this wonderful wild animal live in a cage, behind bars and locked doors?

Then Hanno escapes from the zoo. And a few days later his footprints are seen near Green Knowe, the old house deep in the English countryside where Ping is spending his holiday ...



BOOKWORMS• HUMAN INTEREST• STAGE 2

Anne of Green Gables

L. M. MONTGOMERY

Retold by Clare West

Marilla Cuthbert and her brother Matthew want to adopt an orphan, to help on the farm at Green Gables. They ask for a boy, but they get Anne, who has red hair and freckles, and who talks and talks and talks.

They didn't want a girl, but how can they send a child back, like an unwanted parcel? So Anne stays, and begins a new life in the sleepy, quiet village of Avonlea in Canada.

But it is not so quiet after Anne comes to live there ...



BOOK WORMS • HUMAN INTEREST • STAGE 2

Matty Doolin

CATHERINE COOKSON

Retold by Diane Mowat

Matty is fifteen and is leaving school in a few weeks” time. He wants to work with animals, and would like to get a job on a farm. But his parents say he's too young to leave home - he must stay in the town and get a job in ship-building, like his father. They also say he can't go on a campmg holiday with his friends. And they say he can't keep his dog, Nelson, because Nelson barks all day and eats his father's shoes.

But it is because of Nelson that Matty finds a new life ...



BOOKWORMS• CLASSICS• STAGE 3

Through the Looking-Glass

LEWIS CARROLL

Retold by Jennifer Bassett 

“I wish I could get through into looking-glass house,” Alice said. “Let's pretend that the glass has gone soft and ... Why, I do believe it has! It's turning into a kind of cloud!”

A moment later Alice is inside the looking-glass world. There she finds herself part of a great game of chess, travelling through forests and jumping across brooks. The chess pieces talk and argue with her, give orders and repeat poems ...

It is the strangest dream that anyone ever had ...
