Alice in Wonderland by Lewis Carroll








Goes with audio CD ALICE“S ADVENTURES IN WONDERLAND ”We're all mad here, you know,” said the Cheshire Cat. “I'm mad. You're mad.”

“How do you know that I'm mad?” said Alice.

“Of course you're mad,“ said the Cheshire Cat. ”Only mad people come here.”

This is the story of Alice's dream, one hot summer day long ago. A dream of Wonderland, where the White Rabbit wears gloves and the Caterpillar smokes a pipe ... where the Mad Hatter is always having tea with the March Hare, and where the Queen of Hearts wants to cut off everyone's head ...

It's all very strange, but then, anything can happen in a dream world.



OXFORD BOOKWORMS LIBRARY Classics Alice's Adventures in Wonderland Stage 2 (700 headwords)



Series Editor: Jennifer Bassett Founder Editor: Tricia Hedge Activities Editors: Jennifer Bassett and Alison Baxter LEWIS CARROLL Alice's Adventures In• Wonderland 



Retold by Jennifer Bassett Illustrated by Nilesh Mistry OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS OXFORD UNIVERSITY· PRESS Great Clarendon Street, Oxford ox2 6DP Oxford University Press is a department of the Umversity of Oxford It furthers the Umversity's objective of excellence in research, scholarship.



and education by publishing worldwide m Oxford NewYork Auckland Cape Town Dar es Salaam Hong Kong Karachi Kuala Lumpur Madrid Melbourne Mexico City Nairobi New Delhi Shanghai Taipei Toronto Withofficesm Argentina Austria Brazil Chile Czech Republic France Greece Guatemala Hungary Italy Japan Poland Portugal Singapore South Korea Switzerland Thailand Turkey Ukraine Vietnam OXFORD and OXFORD ENGLISH are registered trade marks of Oxford Uruversity Press in the UK and in certain other countnes This simplified edition © Oxford University Press 2000 Database right Oxford University Press (maker)



First published in Oxford Bookworms 1994 8 10 12 14 16 15 13 11 9 No unauthorized photocopying All rights reserved No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, without the prior permission in writing ofOxford University Press, or as expressly permitted by law, or under terntS agreed with the appropriate reprograplucs rights organization. Enquiries concerning reproduction outside the scope of the above should be sent to the ELT Rights Department, Oxford University Press, at the address above You must not circulate this book in any other binding or cover and you must impose this same condition on any acquirer Any websites referred to in this publication are in the public domain and their addresses are provided by Oxford University Press for information only.



Oxford University Press disclaims any responsibility for the content ISBN-13: 978 0 19 422964 7 ISBN-to: 0 19 422964 5 A complete recording ofthis BookworntS edition of Alice's Adventures in Wonderland is available on cassette ISBN o 19 422775 8 Printed in Spain by UnigrafS.L.



Original illustration on p 50 by John Tennie!, courtesy ofMary Evans Picture Library Ltd CONTENTS 








