4 Job Fit

Everyone has been made for some particular work, and the desire for that work has been put in every heart.

— Rumi

WORKING AT A JOB that utilizes your gifts and leverages your knowledge creates wonderful feelings of contribution and satisfaction. It’s that sweet sense of really being in your zone, doing what you do well and being acknowledged for it. We call this job fit. It happens when the responsibilities of your work align with your talents and provide opportunities for growth. A quote from one of our survey respondents sums it up well – she said that for her, job fit happened when “I was good at what I did, valued for it, and able to learn a lot.”

Do you remember being asked when you were a kid, “What do you want to be when you grow up?” Our first toys – dolls, Legos, or art supplies – are often geared to helping us try out our future professions. Some of us dream of fighting fires, others of traveling in space or helping the sick. Over time, we start to differentiate. We may share our best friend’s desire to be a pilot, but while her second choice is to be a marine biologist, we think being a chef is much more interesting. Only a few people will follow these early interests in a linear path; in fact, our career trajectories often appear quite random and rooted in circumstances. Nevertheless, our childhood dreams provide important clues about the job situations that truly make our hearts sing.

ASK YOURSELF . . .

• When I was a child, what did I want to be when I grew up?

• How did my childhood interests impact my path as an adult?



As we go through school, our interests start to intertwine with information on our aptitudes and talents. Teachers provide feedback on what we’re “good at.” For better or worse, these critiques impact how we view ourselves and how we envision our future. Are you a whiz at math? Perhaps a job in accounting is in store. Are your drawings always the ones that get featured in the school art show? Maybe you’re headed for a career in graphic design. We move into adulthood and declare a major, start an apprenticeship, or land a first job responding to a combination of these interests and aptitudes as well as a variety of inputs from family and friends. For some of us, the perfect picture of job fit emerges early and stays consistent. For others, it’s an ongoing journey of trial and error to return to the joy we experienced as kids role-playing our future desired profession.

Regardless of your stage in your career journey, finding the best job fit involves understanding and utilizing three factors – discovering your skills, gaining experience, and identifying your interests (see Figure 4-1).

Discovering Skills

Skills are foundational to job fit. You feel great when you can use your unique talents, abilities, and personal qualities to accomplish something and make a contribution to your company and to the world. As one survey respondent said about the importance of skills to her sense of fit, “Now I’m applying my professional skills in my specific professional area, and I have reached the top of my career. I’m very happy about this!”

Skills include areas such as written and verbal communication, planning and organizing, computer knowledge, and mechanical ability. Natural skill areas typically emerge early in our lives. Someone who loved standing up and doing oral reports in school is likely to exhibit the communication skills required to be a successful salesperson. An individual who constantly took apart and rebuilt things from their parents’ garage is likely to have developed the mechanical skills that are necessary in engineering.



Figure 4-1. Regardless of where you are in your career journey, finding the best job fit involves understanding and utilizing three factors – skills, experience, and interests.

Skills may be directly related to functional job knowledge, such as a doctor’s understanding of disease and appropriate treatments, or they may be indirect (or transferable), such as that same doctor’s skill in communicating to patients or delegating tasks to staff. When considering your skills, it’s critical to think about both your direct and indirect skills. Indirect skills like persuasion, organization, and leadership can transfer among many types of jobs and may be key to opening new opportunities. Most of us have a far broader spectrum of skills than we first acknowledge. For example, a computer programmer will have functional knowledge of a specific programming language that can easily transfer to a similar job in another company, but they will also have skills in areas such as problem solving and writing technical specifications that could be utilized in a vastly different job. Use the tool in Appendix 1, “Analyze Your Employability Skills,” to assess your broad skills that are applicable to many kinds of jobs.

Our skills and preferences tend to lead us toward various occupations. Holland’s (1997) theory of vocational choice provides one helpful model for mapping skills and personality types to possible careers. Holland groups individuals by one of six personality types: Realistic, Investigative, Artistic, Social, Enterprising, and Conventional. He then tracks each type to occupations that attract like-minded individuals. For example, individuals with realistic personalities gravitate toward activities that involve motor coordination, motor skills, and physical strength. They tend to prefer being physically involved in their work and might enjoy occupations such as electrician or aircraft controller. In contrast, individuals with social personalities gravitate toward activities that promote the health, education, and well-being of others, and they might enjoy work as teachers or psychologists. Appendix 2, “Holland’s Six Occupation Types,” presents a complete description of the six personality types.

ASK YOURSELF . . .

• What are my top three direct and indirect skills?

• What skills or traits do I think of as my personal superpowers??



Gaining Experience

Our natural skills are enhanced through education and experience. College classes, training, certification programs, and jobs can all play a role in developing and fine-tuning skills that contribute to job fit. A teacher with an education degree has built upon natural skills and gained the knowledge to control a classroom and prepare a lesson plan. By waiting on tables and working in the kitchen, a restaurant manager has gained the experience needed to ensure smooth operations throughout the restaurant.

Experience is related to the amount of time we’ve performed various jobs (more time equals more experience) and also to the particular events we’ve encountered. A young doctor who works in an urban hospital emergency room may have significantly more experience handling crisis situations than an older doctor with many years in a rural private practice.

For most of us, a strong sense of being valued for our skills and experience – our domain expertise – is a powerful component of job satisfaction. In many of our interviews, people lit up when they talked about a job where they felt uniquely capable to contribute.

Alison was hired to build a loyalty program for a new airline. She was brought in as an expert and liked being recognized for having a specific skill set that the company needed. “They were looking to me to lead the way in this area, which felt amazing. I loved being valued for my experience and knowledge and empowered to do what I do best.” Her colleagues were also highly qualified in their individual areas. “Everyone had a special expertise and was operating at a very high level. We were all using our experience to make something great.”

We work hard to build our knowledge through education and experience. It makes sense that we want to see it fully utilized and valued by our employers.

ASK YOURSELF . . .

• What experiences stand out as crucial to my growth in my career?

• What experiences have given me the most joy?



Identifying Interests

For a great job fit, you not only need the skills and experience to do the work but also genuine interest in the work itself. Confucius said, “Choose a job you love, and you will never have to work a day in your life.” More recently, Steve Jobs (2005) echoed the idea by saying, “The only way to do great work is to love what you do.” Sincere interest is one of the keys to great job fit; without it you may succeed but you won’t thrive.

Such was the case with George. George showed an early aptitude for math. His father was an accountant and encouraged him to follow in his footsteps. “I didn’t really get excited about my accounting classes in college, but I picked up the material pretty quickly and it seemed like a secure profession, so I declared it as my major, sat for the CPA exam, and began work for one of the big accounting firms. I’m a pretty social person, and it didn’t take long for me to become frustrated by the many hours alone crunching numbers. I felt a little stuck because I had invested so many hours in training for the job. I wish I had thought more in college about how I might actually like the work.”

As one friend noted about misfit, “I felt like I was doing what I was really good at . . . it just wasn’t as gratifying as I hoped. What you’re really good at doesn’t always equate to what you enjoy doing.”

When you have a job that aligns with your personal interests, it feels less like work. While we don’t subscribe to the notion that if you simply do what you love, success will follow, we do believe that, when you genuinely enjoy or are passionate about the work you do, the work is less onerous and more interesting and stimulating. And the opposite is true as well. If you spend day after day doing work that bores you, it will ultimately show up in your performance and attitude. As one survey respondent said, “I’m passionate about my job, and it makes the long days fly by!”

For some individuals, interest in a job may be related to a personal passion. Chad loved his first job out of college working for a radio station because it connected him to his lifelong love of music. “Music was a big part of my life, and growing up this had been the coolest radio station in my town, so it was a dream come true to work there.” The tasks and the pay mattered a lot less than the opportunity to interact with fans and bands and be part of a music scene. Chad knew it was “what I wanted to spend my life doing.”

For others, interest is tied to a broader desire, such as leading, teaching, or solving difficult problems. Suzi, who works for a nonprofit, describes her job fit in this way: “I’ve been most content when working in civil service (teaching, nonprofit work, etc.) where my daily responsibilities were helping people. I just love doing jobs that directly result in building hope.”

It’s important to figure out the interests that will drive you to become the very best you can be. What are the activities that make you want to jump out of bed in the morning ready to take on the world? What are the things that will make you want to give 100 percent of yourself, rather than putting in the minimum requirement to pick up a paycheck?

ASK YOURSELF . . .

• When I’ve had a good day, what have I spent more time doing?

• If money wasn’t a factor, how would I spend my time?

• How could I use my strengths and aptitudes in a way that would really feel good?



The Importance of Growth

Beyond matching your interests, experience, and skills, there’s one other critical component that turns a good job fit into a great one – the opportunity for growth. In fact, in our research, the number one factor correlated to happiness at work was the opportunity for growth and development. Conversely, lack of growth was a primary reason for people to leave their jobs. Sometimes that lack of growth happens over time, and opportunity just runs out. “While I had an excellent relationship with my boss and coworkers, I had gone as far as I could in the company, and no personal growth was in sight for the future. To grow I felt I needed to move on.” On other occasions, it feels much more painful and personal. “My boss stifled my growth, didn’t respect me, and was condescending toward her employees. Leaving the job felt like a breath of fresh air, a huge weight lifted off my shoulders, and a step in the right direction to pursuing my dreams.”

Victor Lipman (2014), author of The Type B Manager: Leading Successfully in a Type A World, notes that “employees will always perform at their best when the environment is conducive to growth.” He recognizes four different types of growth opportunities and notes that employees differ in which ones they see as most motivating.

• Financial Growth – Incentives preferably tied to employee performance

• Career Growth – Titles, added responsibilities, plusher offices, the respect of others in the organization . . . the various components of career advancement

• Professional Growth – The opportunity to improve skills and broaden knowledge

• Personal Growth – The more emotional aspects of life at work such as the opportunity to make new friends or receive recognition from peers

Along with being motivated by different sources of growth, we also have differing needs around the amount of “stretch opportunity” that’s available to us. Some of us, like Michele, crave constant change and need jobs that are fast-paced and filled with new learning opportunities. She describes great fit as “drinking out of a fire hose and constantly diving into new challenges.” Others just need a bit of variety to keep the day from getting wearisome. But all of us are wired for growth and personal development. All of us gain confidence and feel more fulfilled when we not only use our existing talents but are also able to develop new skills.

We believe that great job fit happens when we aren’t so comfortable that we can do our job on autopilot, but where we aren’t stressed in a way that erodes our confidence. One client described this as their zone of development – a place where they felt “mentally stimulated and challenged without being overwhelmed.” Development may come informally through new job responsibilities or more formally through on-the-job training or mentorship. When we’re in this zone we feel challenged, but the probability of success is good, and both the reward and the satisfaction are high.

For each of us, the balance between leveraging our current abilities and building new skills is highly personal. Our desired balance may change at different stages of our life and career, but the constant we see over time is that the ability to learn and grow is a crucial part of finding great job fit. As one survey respondent noted, “A wonderful fit is one in which you’re challenged but supported, engaged but not overwhelmed. My current company has a culture that expects results but also expects its employees to grow and change over time. There are plentiful ways in which support and appreciation are shown, and the company provides the tools and resources for departments and individuals to perform at a high level. In an environment like this, knowing that I can aim higher and set stretch goals fills me with a willingness to innovate and think big. Regardless of whether my innovations or big thoughts could be implemented or are realistic or successful, just pursuing this level of envisioning what success looks like prepares me to grow professionally.”

Daniel H. Pink (2009), author of five provocative bestselling books about the changing world of work, sums it up well by saying, “On days when workers have the sense they’re making headway in their jobs, or when they receive support that helps them overcome obstacles, their emotions are most positive and their drive to succeed is at its peak.”

ASK YOURSELF . . .

• When do I remember experiencing rewarding growth and development?

• What was the situation? How did it feel?

• What are areas where I would like to have more opportunity to grow?

• What’s the right balance between comfort and stretch for me?





Checklist 4-1. Check all of the statements above that apply to you. Use the checklist as a reference as you progress in finding job fit. You’ll return to your answers in a final assessment of your work fit in Chapter 13.

Assess Your Job Fit

Once you understand which skills and experiences you want to use or further develop in your job, it’s not difficult to assess job fit in your current work situation. Checklist 4-1 can provide a helpful framework.

If your checklist indicates that there are areas of opportunity to enhance your job fit, know that there are many strategies available to you to address it. We’ll discuss these strategies in Chapter 15, “Flexing to Fit Where You Are.” Job fit is also one of the easier elements of work fit to assess when you’re evaluating new opportunities. Matching your job responsibilities to your skills, interest, and experience is critical to great job fit. It will be difficult to thrive if you don’t feel able to perform well at your job even though you find it fulfilling and your organization provides opportunities for growth. So it’s important that you and your job match. Finding that match takes persistence and courage, but it’s possible to regain or create that sense of opportunity and excitement we felt as kids when we were role-playing future dream jobs. And the best part? Now we can get paid for doing it.





