About the Authors





Moe Carrick is Principal and Founder of Moementum, Inc., a Certified BCorp and consulting firm dedicated to the vision of creating a world that works for everyone, using business as a force for good. Her diverse client portfolio includes Prudential Financial, REI, ABB, Nike, Nintendo, Hydroflask, The Nature Conservancy, and others. Moe writes regularly for the Work Smart Blog and Conscious Company Media, and was a featured consultant in Fast Company magazine. A frequent presenter, she has spoken at South by Southwest (SXSW), TEDxPeachtree, TEDxSanJuan Island, the Women’s Center for Leadership, the American Public Works Association, and the Human Resource Management Association. She is a Coach, a Certified Daring Way Facilitator, a Certified Senior Human Resource Professional, and holds an MS in Organizational Management from Antioch University.



Cammie Dunaway is a Global Chief Marketing Officer, Brand Consultant, and Public Board member. She most recently served as U.S. President and Global Chief Marketing Officer of KidZania. Previously she served as Executive Vice President of Sales and Marketing at Nintendo and as Chief Marketing Officer at Yahoo! after having spent more than a decade in various leadership positions with Frito Lay, where she was named one of the 100 Top Marketers by Advertising Age. Cammie sits on the Board of Directors for Nordstrom Bank, Red Robin, and Marketo. A frequent presenter, she has spoken at The Conference Board’s Summit on Corporate Brand and Reputation, TEDxHarkerSchool, South by Southwest (SXSW), and Venture Beats Growth Conference, and for numerous companies including General Mills, LinkedIn, PayPal, and Unilever. She holds a BA from the University of Richmond and an MBA from Harvard Business School.





CAREERS/HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT/PERSONAL SUCCESS

Praise for Fit Matters

“A must-read for anyone looking for their next amazing opportunity or who wants to tweak their current situation to make the fit just a bit better.”

— Pat Wadors, SVP, Global Talent Organization, LinkedIn “Read this book if you want to find the career of your dreams.”

— Tim Sanders, New York Times bestselling author of Love is the Killer App “We should all love our jobs – and what Carrick and Dunaway prove is that we all can.”

— Margaret Heffernan, author of Beyond Measure and A Bigger Prize “You can be happy, even joyous, in your job if it’s the right fit. By showing you how to tap in to your core professional and personal values, Fit Matters is your can’t-miss guide to great career satisfaction!”

— Marshall Goldsmith, New York Times bestselling author of Triggers “If you want to make a change to increase your happiness and achieve your full potential, then Fit Matters is the book for you.”

— Jen Dulski, CEO, Change.org

“This guidebook is a great choice to help find a role that brings you true joy. Full of practical, pivotal, and pithy advice and actionable assessments to discover your path from purpose to fulfillment.”

— Denny Post, CEO and President, Red Robin

“A great guide for managers and leaders who want to build world-class teams!”

— Annie Young-Scrivner, EVP, Starbucks and Board of Directors, Macy’s Inc.

When you find your fit you deliver the best results and create attractive growth and career opportunities. Fit Matters shows you how.

— Xavier Lopez Ancona, Founder and CEO, KidZania “Before taking on a new job, do your homework. Don’t take the job if there is a misalignment to what is important to you. Fit Matters offers inspiration and ideas for ensuring that you find positive work fit.”

— Michelle Clements, Vice President, Human Resources, Seattle University





