14 Regaining Your Confidence

Don’t let the noise of others’ opinions drown out your own inner voice.

— Steve Jobs

WHEN WORK DOESN’T WORK IT HURTS, and it often triggers self-criticism and a loss of confidence. As you try harder and harder to fit in, you may become more and more frustrated and anxious. We’ve seen scores of talented, successful people, with great track records of accomplishment, become incapacitated with self-doubt as they wonder why they just can’t seem to make the impact they were hoping for.

Recognizing the situation and then recovering from work misfit requires that you reconnect to a sense of your unique and amazing talents. Instead of mercilessly judging and criticizing yourself for various inadequacies or shortcomings, you need to regain a sense of your innate worth. In her ground-breaking book, Self-Compassion, Kristen Neff (2015) talks about the need to honor and accept our humanness. She notes that things will not always go the way you want them to. You’ll encounter frustrations, experience losses, make mistakes, bump up against your limitations, and fall short of your ideals. This is the human condition, a reality shared by all of us. The more you open your heart to this reality, instead of constantly fighting against it, the more you’ll be able to experience your misfit as a step in your journey rather than as a damning statement about who you are.

Brené Brown’s groundbreaking research on wholeheartedness has revealed that people who possess great resilience don’t fail less often or less spectacularly than others; rather, they proceed with courage even when self-doubt, fear, and failure threaten to stop them in their tracks. In her latest book, Rising Strong, Brown (2015) details ways in which people rise from low confidence and poor performance through vulnerability and perseverance. She uncovers the mechanics of vulnerability and why emotional curiosity – getting curious about your feelings and how they connect with the way you think and behave – is the key to rising strong when we struggle, suffer, or fail. One of our favorite expressions of hers is “the story in my own head,” which is a way of describing the stories we make up about ourselves and the choices we have. Unfortunately, these stories may encourage self-doubt. What story do you tell yourself about the situation you’re in? Is it based in reality, or is it formed by your own guilt, fear, anxiety, or grief? What new story can you tell yourself in order to face your situation realistically and bravely?

Frequently we’re harsher and less forgiving in evaluating our own situations than we would be with a friend or family member. To create a new story, it can be useful to think about what you might do if someone else were in your situation. What advice would you give? How would you help them? Exercising self-compassion and creating a new story can start with stepping back and looking at your situation from a different perspective.

ASK YOURSELF . . .

• How has my poor work fit situation shaken my confidence?

• What’s the story in my head?

• What advice would I give a friend in my situation?



Key Actions to Start Moving Forward

We’ve learned several techniques that you can use to make sense out of misfit and move forward to create a new story and overcome your self-doubt.

Celebrate Accomplishments

Reminding yourself of all the things that you’ve accomplished in the past and are accomplishing now can positively affect your attitude. In addition to keeping a to-do list, take a moment at the end of the day to make a brief have-done list. These accomplishments can be as major as closing a sale or as simple as engaging in a positive interaction with a coworker. Crafting a list like this can give you a renewed appreciation for the things you’ve been able to achieve for the day, which in turn can produce a little emotional boost. And keeping an ongoing list of accomplishments is useful for two scenarios: negotiating with your boss about changes in your work, or updating your resume and talking to potential employers about your accomplishments.

Try a Growth Mindset

In her book, Mindset: The New Psychology of Success, Stanford psychologist Carol Dweck (2007) discusses the power of our beliefs, both conscious and unconscious, and how changing them can profoundly determine our future course. Dweck describes a “fixed mindset” as the belief that our character, intelligence, and creative ability are static and unchangeable and, therefore, that success is achieved by meeting a fixed standard without failure. On the other hand, someone with a “growth mindset” thrives on a challenge and sees failure as a fertile ground for growth and change.

Taking time to think deeply about the challenges you’re facing in your current role and to craft ideas for small and large changes within your control can vastly improve your mindset and your ability to see potential in a difficult situation. It also can help you to feel confident in your ability to be successful despite the difficulties. In the context of a growth mindset, the setbacks you’re facing in work fit can serve as motivators and as the impetus to make changes that will help.

Turn to Trusted Partners

During times of self-doubt, you’ll find it helpful to surround yourself with people who understand you, who see your strengths and weaknesses and love and accept you anyway. These supporters are safe havens with whom you can share your feelings of self-doubt because they’ll listen, empathize, and remind you of your innate strengths, serving as your personal cheering squad. They have seen you at your best and can remind you of what that looks like. They may be a partner, a friend, or a former coworker. Ask for what you need from these people – sometimes it will be their advice and counsel, but other times it’s just for them to be present and listen. You may also want to engage a professional life coach or counselor. These people are trained to help you objectively understand difficult situations and the feelings they trigger, and they can help you to chart a positive course forward.

Sarah experienced the pain of losing her self-confidence in a poor work fit situation, and then she regained control through honest reflection and the help of friends. After graduating with her MBA, Sarah was excited about joining a well-regarded company known for its expertise in mergers and acquisitions. The president was an alumnus of her school, and she had had great conversations with him and with the CEO. They were smart and engaging, and she felt that she could add value to the company and learn a lot. She had a brief interview with the woman who would be her direct supervisor. While the woman struck Sarah as a bit immature and overly critical of her analytic background, Sarah convinced herself that it was still a great opportunity. “By the second week I was concerned that I had made a mistake. My boss was only a few years older than me and was always trying to one-up me; like bragging about how much better her business school was than mine. She seemed to go out of her way to assert her authority. For example, she would upgrade herself when we traveled and not even wait until I got off the plane to say goodbye. She called and emailed at all hours and throughout the weekend and made me travel and work in difficult situations without offering any support.”

Despite her discomfort, Sarah continued to work long hours and take on additional projects in the hopes of being able to turn the situation around. “I had always been successful. I didn’t want to face the thought that I couldn’t make this work. I just kept trying to work harder.” After seven months of feeling used and disrespected, it came to a head when the boss ignored a long-standing request Sarah had made to not work on the evening of her birthday and sent her out of town at the last minute. “Despite my anger, I felt that I had to comply. It was only through the encouragement of friends, who pointed out the abusive treatment, that I finally got the courage to resign. It wasn’t just that I was treated so poorly, it was my disappointment that the company would allow that kind of behavior. I’m so glad that I had good people in my life who could help me read the situation and who told me that it was something I shouldn’t accept.”

ASK YOURSELF . . .

• What have I achieved today, this week, this month that I feel good about?

• What learning might be available to me now?

• Who can I turn to for support and perspective?



Practicing Self-Care

Being unhappy or feeling frustrated at work takes a huge emotional toll. It drains energy and causes you to lose perspective. Whether you’ve decided to try to make your current job fit better or that it’s time to leave, one of the most important things is to make sure that you’re taking care of yourself. So before tackling the work situation itself, make sure that you’re equipped to do your best work. When we’re struggling with fit, we’re battling challenges to our confidence, to our energy, to our self-esteem. Our unhappiness at work tends to push us even harder into unproductive behaviors, or it causes us to disengage. We allow the unhappiness to spill into other parts of our life. We often enter into a vicious spiral where our actions make things worse rather than better.

This is a time to honor the things in your life that give you joy and energy. You need to take extra care with your health and with the relationships that matter the most to you. Here are some relatively easy things that you can do that can make a big difference. You don’t have to do everything; just pick two or three that speak to you and invest in them.

Get a Good Nights’ Sleep

Sleeping poorly ruins your day. The more tired you are, the harder it is to concentrate and the more susceptible you are to feeling depressed and irritable. In turn this can create a vicious spiral – it’s tough to perform at work and you become more easily discouraged by challenges and less confident in your results.

When researchers at Harvard Medical School had adults do a task once, get a good night’s sleep, and then try the task again, they showed improvement. But participants who stayed awake 30 hours after learning the same task had a much harder time improving their skills – even if they practiced and had a chance to catch some recovery shut eye later (Stickgold, James, and Hobson 2000). The initial sleep deprivation impaired their ability to learn.

Additional research shows that sleep loss has an even stronger effect on mood than it does on cognitive ability or motor function. People who sleep less tend to have more symptoms of depression, lower self-esteem, and more anxiety (Colton and Altevogt 2006).

Jeff Bezos is one of the many executives who talk about the benefits of sleep. In various interviews he has shared that eight hours of sleep gives him the alertness and clarity of thought necessary to tackle each day’s challenges. Even in the difficult early years of Amazon, instead of sacrificing rest to work around the clock building his company, Bezos ended his day and went to bed.

There are numerous guides to getting a good night’s sleep with techniques that include discovering your optimal sleep schedule, boosting your melatonin, or making your bedroom more sleep-friendly. Read up on the methods available and experiment to find what works best for you. When you’re struggling at work you need all the strength you can muster, and getting a good night’s sleep is more critical than ever.

Take a Break

It’s becoming more common to go through our workdays without stopping. We take pride in a calendar that’s filled with appointments from start to finish. We eat lunch at our desk while catching up on emails. We even know executives who schedule individual meetings with direct reports while walking from one conference room to another! Being busy has become a badge of honor.

A growing body of evidence, however, including a study from the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, shows that taking regular breaks from mental tasks improves productivity and creativity – and that skipping breaks can lead to stress and exhaustion (Ariga and Lleras 2011). Even something as simple as looking away from your keyboard for at least five minutes every hour to rest your mind and eyes can make a difference.

Scheduling downtime at work isn’t selfish, it’s not a sign of weakness, it’s not a signal of inefficiency – it’s a crucial part of doing your best work. If you work long hours alone on a computer, set an alarm to remind yourself to get up and stretch every hour. Set up lunch with a colleague or a friend. Get outside for a quick walk in the afternoon.

If you have a job that’s filled with meetings, mark out time every day on your calendar for reflection. Jeff Weiner, the famously hard-charging CEO of LinkedIn, purposely schedules 30- to 90-minute blocks of “nothing” in his calendar for personal time and reflection. He says that while these periods of nothing first felt like indulgences, he realized over time that “not only were these breaks important, they were absolutely necessary in order for me to do my job.” He suggests that you “think big, catch up on the latest industry news, get out from under that pile of unread emails, or just take a walk.”

When you’re struggling with fit, one of the most important things is not to just react to events and emotions but to take time to step back and reflect on your experiences. Taking a daily break, or, better yet, a long weekend or vacation, is a great start.

Get Some Exercise

We’re all well aware of the benefits of regular exercise for physical health and stamina. What’s equally important is the benefit for our mood. Physical activity stimulates various brain chemicals that may leave you feeling happier and more relaxed. Exercise and physical activity deliver oxygen and nutrients to your tissues, which in turn gives you more energy.

Exercise doesn’t have to be a huge time commitment. According to a recent study in the Journal of the American College of Cardiology, running just five minutes a day can provide the same health benefits as running much more (Lee et al. 2014). Exercise could be as simple as walking up the stairs at work or as ambitious as participating in your first triathlon, but engage in some type of physical activity – it will improve your mood and confidence, and it will equip you to think more clearly about your situation at work.

Write in a Journal

Keeping a journal is useful not just for writers and teenage girls. Meebo co-founder Elaine Wherry kept a 100 Mistakes Diary, which she credits for helping to guide her team through its 2012 acquisition by Google. Black Eyed Peas front woman Fergie used her journal to help kick an addiction to crystal meth and to set goals to write a number one song and win a Grammy. Filmmaker George Lucas takes a pocket notebook everywhere for writing down ideas, inspirations, and possible plot angles.

It works for work, too: a Harvard Business School study found that people who wrote about their jobs improved their performance by 23 percent (Stefano et al. 2016). The process of reflecting will boost your learning and increase your confidence and ultimately your performance.

You can journal with a digital tool such as Evernote or in a personal blog on WordPress.com. You can write with a fine pen in a beautiful handcrafted notebook. You can doodle with colored pencils. You can snap photos of things that represent your day. You can adhere to a strict regimen, like writing three pages a day, as suggested by Julia Cameron (2002) in The Artist’s Way, or you can simply take five minutes to jot down accomplishments, inspirations, and observations. You can rant about your boss or dream about your future. You don’t write for anyone to read; you write simply for you to record. The important thing is tapping into the power that comes from documenting your thoughts – this both diffuses their ability to distract you and unleashes their ability to inform you. Figure 14-1 offers some prompts to help you with daily journaling.

Try a Digital Detox

Technology has taken over our lives and enabled the workday to stretch far beyond its traditional boundaries. According to a study by retailer Pixmania, smartphones have people in Britain working an extra two hours a day (Pan 2012). Our experience working and traveling around the world suggests that this isn’t unique.

For some people, on some occasions, the expanded use of technology can be a good thing. Technology can enable you to leave the office early to catch a child’s soccer game while still keeping an eye on a critical work situation. It may make it possible to relax more on a vacation if you know that you won’t have to triage hundreds of emails on the day you return. But is it really making us more productive to answer emails throughout the evening, on the weekends, and on our holidays? Are we really better because we’re always on?



Figure 14-1. Questions you might consider asking yourself for your daily journal.

John Pencavel (2014) of Stanford University studied the relationship between working hours and productivity among British munitions workers. What he found was that there was a non-linear relationship between working hours and output. Below 49 weekly hours, variations in output are proportional to variations in hours. But when people worked more than about 50 hours, output rose at a decreasing rate. Output at 70 hours of work differed little from output at 56 hours. That extra 14 hours of work was a waste of time.

While it might be challenging to cut your actual hours at work, you may be able to limit how you allow technology to expand them. Some studies have found that excessive reliance on technology can make us more distracted, impatient, and forgetful (Parker-Pope 2010). More and more individuals are electing to take weekly “technology shabbats,” and many of us are looking for ways to live our tech-saturated lives more mindfully (Headspace 2013, Shlain 2012). This practice can be particularly useful when you need to gain a fresh perspective on the difference in fit between your current work and your desired work.

David Mintz, CEO and founder of Tofutti Brands, picks one night a week to turn his smartphone off completely. He uses that night to clear his head and remove himself from his work life. “Taking a break is a good thing for you – smartphones can cloud judgment,” he says. “Clearing your life every once in a while of distractions will make you a better business owner or employee and improve your career.”

Take Some Deep Breaths

The term “fight or flight” is also known as the stress response. It’s what the body does as it prepares to confront or avoid danger. The cause doesn’t have to be life threatening. Challenges such as difficult coworkers, lack of resources, or intense pressure to perform can create stress. In turn the stress response can suppress the immune system, increasing susceptibility to illnesses, and it can contribute to anxiety and depression.

A counter to the stress response is to invoke the relaxation response, which is accomplished by using a breathing technique first developed in the 1970s at Harvard Medical School by cardiologist Dr. Herbert Benson (Benson and Klipper 2000). The key to relaxed breathing is to engage the diaphragm, bringing the air in through your nose, completely filling your lungs, and allowing your lower belly to rise; then exhale slowly through your mouth. Deep breathing can be a beneficial daily practice, and, at a minimum, it’s a good way to step back and ground yourself when the workday becomes particularly challenging.

Practice Mindfulness

Though it has its roots in Buddhist meditation, the secular practice of mindfulness has entered the American mainstream in recent years, with thousands of studies documenting its physical and mental health benefits. Companies such as Google, Facebook, and Twitter have added mindfulness classes, rooms for quiet meditation, and even practices such as “mindful lunches,” conducted in complete silence except for the ringing of prayer bells.

Mindfulness involves acceptance, meaning that you pay attention to thoughts and feelings without judging them – without believing, for instance, that there’s a right or wrong way to think or feel at a given moment. When you practice mindfulness, your thoughts tune in to what you’re sensing at the present moment, rather than rehashing the past or imagining the future. There are lots of online resources and even great mobile apps to help you get started with a mindfulness practice. Below we’ve outlined a simple approach:

• Choose a time when you have ten minutes to yourself, and find a quiet place to sit comfortably.

• Acknowledge any thoughts or judgments you have about starting your mindfulness practice. Our minds are constantly thinking, so you may want to notice whether you’re caught up in thoughts as you get ready for your practice. If that’s the case, simply acknowledge the thoughts and emotions that come into your awareness, and then refocus on getting settled and comfortable.

• Once you’re settled and comfortable, you can choose to close your eyes or keep your gaze focused on one spot in front of you. Take a few deep breaths and then begin by bringing your attention to your breath as you breathe in. Notice the tip of your nose as your breath enters your body. Continue to breathe normally, following your inhalations as your breath flows down into your lungs. Notice your lungs expand as your breath fills them, and then notice them begin to contract during your exhalations.

• Continue following your breath in this manner for ten minutes. The first few times you practice you may find that much of your time is spent lost in thought rather than focused on your breathing. You may lose focus and bring your attention back many, many times over the course of several minutes. Don’t worry, this is part of the practice.

We hope that some of the ideas above can help you deal with the feeling of misfit and prepare you to move forward. Being misfit hurts. Even the most experienced and self-assured individuals can struggle to regain their bearings. Reestablishing a sense of who you are, what you want, and what you’re capable of achieving helps to assure you that, whether you stay in your current job or move on, you’ll be better equipped to tackle the challenges with a sense of optimism and possibility. Being kind to yourself and taking extra good care of your physical and mental well-being will help prepare you for the better future ahead.

Remember that even if you’re misfit in your job, you’re still worthy. You still matter, and there’s a better fit out there somewhere for you. Stop comparing yourself to others and finding yourself wanting, stop feeling bad that your effort alone can’t fix this, and stop waiting until you or the situation are perfect before making a change. Admit misfit, and start doing what you can to fix it!





