15 Flexing to Fit Where You Are

Flexibility makes buildings to be stronger, imagine what it can do to your soul.

— Carlos Barrios

CERTAIN ELEMENTS OF YOUR JOB are just not working for you right now. You’re ready for a change, but not quite ready to quit. We recognize that it’s often just not feasible to pack up your office and leave in an instant, fist in the air. A tough economy, family commitments, limited opportunities in your field, financial pressures, and numerous other reasons create situations in which a job change might be unwise. A job search takes time, and when you’re searching for a great work fit it can take even longer. Whether you’re hoping you might be able to work things out in your current organization, or you need some time to find the right new job, it’s possible to make your day-to-day experience better. We call this flexing to fit.

When we feel misfit, we often end up on an emotional rollercoaster, experiencing sadness, anger, discouragement, and a feeling that everything is spinning out of control. Before you can change the circumstances, you’ll need to try to change your attitude. This is a mind-over-matter approach, and in our experience, for many people, shifting thoughts can powerfully alter perspective and make a poor-fit situation tolerable or, occasionally, much improved. The adage that we can’t change other people, but we can adjust our own attitudes and actions, rings very true in misfit work situations. Stephen Covey (1989) championed this notion in his blockbuster book Seven Habits of Highly Successful People when he encouraged readers to “focus on what you can control.”

Surveys, studies, and research consistently indicate that 85 percent of success in almost any endeavor is dependent on attitude and only 15 percent is dependent on aptitude. If you decide that you’re miserable in your job and focus on that fact, then, consciously or unconsciously, you’ll do things that reinforce your misery. Alternatively, if you decide that you’re willing to flex, you might be able to shift your attitude and some aspects of your performance – and your level of positive fit. We aren’t saying to just suck it up, but we are saying that your work may have some good aspects and that you’ll feel better if you refocus your attention in that direction. Even if you’re in the process of leaving, shifting your thoughts and energy to the few things that may be working well will be a better way to make the transition to a happier future.

That’s what happened to Julie, who, 13 years into her career, joined a small, prestigious cosmetics company in a director role. She was particularly excited because of the caliber of the senior leadership team and the quality of the product. Her job was clear and in her sweet spot. She jumped right in. “I couldn’t wait to apply what I knew to this challenge.”

About four months into the job everything changed. The board brought in new leadership and shifted the direction of the company. “This wasn’t what I had signed on for, and I didn’t believe it would enable me to learn and expand my skills in the way I had hoped.” To make matters worse, the new managers made some significant decisions about quality that Julie felt were inconsistent with her values.

“I recognized that this was probably not the right place for me, but I didn’t want to leave so soon after I started. Also, I really liked the team I had hired.” To make the best of the situation, Julie focused on the tasks that met the new organizational goals but still provided some learning opportunities for her. “I stuck it out for a year and a half, trying to grow my skills and do the best work I possibly could while keeping my eyes open for another job. I had a lot of frustrating moments, but when the right call came I was ready to move but also able to show an impact from the job I had been in.”

Based on the assessments you completed in earlier chapters and your work in Chapter 13, “Calculating the Elements and Weighing Trade-Offs,” you should now be aware of which of the work-fit elements feel most misaligned for you and which are most important to work on. Like Julie, it might be about job content and culture, or it might be a change in lifestyle or a difficult relationship with a new boss. Being flexible means bending without breaking. It doesn’t mean compromising core values or giving up on your essential requirements for happiness. It simply means taking a step back to reflect on the possibility that making small changes that you can control might make a meaningful difference in how you feel. The following are specific techniques around each of the elements that you can use to flex in ways that will help you survive and, hopefully, move forward to a better work fit.

Flexing to Improve Meaning Fit

For the growing number of employees for whom meaning truly matters, losing your connection to purpose or feeling unseen and disconnected can be one of the most painful misfit experiences. It’s difficult to be enthusiastic about work, and very difficult to perform at your best, if you’re not sure that what you do matters. While you’re unlikely to change the mission of the company, and you may ultimately find that employment with another organization is the right long-term fix, there are strategies for improving your current day-to-day situation.

Remember Why You Took the Job

It’s likely that you picked the job you’re in because something about it aligned to one or more values that you hold dear. If you feel that you no longer fit in your company, it’s possible that you’ve lost sight of whatever initially drew you to the opportunity. If so, it’s probably time to try to reconnect your personal values and your current situation. Spend time reflecting on what was exciting when you first took the job. Try journaling or talking to a friend about what really matters to you and how the job might meet your needs. Evaluate your ability to contribute your best and make a strong impact.

Reconnect to What Matters

Once you’ve re-examined your core motivations, look for ways to bring them forward in your day-to-day work. It often helps to keep a list of moments that matter. Beth, a geriatric nurse, was struggling with all the frustrating and menial tasks she had to do in her organization. So she decided to focus on what really mattered to her, the fact that she was making a difference in the lives of others, and she savored the value she derived from that. She posted letters from appreciative families in a prominent place in her office to keep this feeling front and center during her day. This helped her feel good that she was doing work that mattered to her rather than feeling frustrated with the job’s menial tasks.

Find Out How Your Role Impacts Others

Most of us need to know that what we do matters. Ask your boss or colleagues for feedback on how your work impacts the greater whole. Try to spend time in other areas of the organization so that you can better understand the complete business process. What may seem like a trivial task on the surface may make a big difference to customer satisfaction or to the ability of people in other departments to do their jobs. Inviting others to give you context for why what you do matters can make a huge difference in how you see your role and in your level of motivation.

Consider the Company Mission

Meaning may be found by better understanding and seeking ways to support the company’s mission. To help connect your work to the greater good, talk to your boss and others at work about the company’s mission and how it matters to the world. Many organizations have foundations that support charitable activities or provide opportunities for community service. Find ways to get involved with these service initiatives.

Look Outside Your Job

When you’re struggling with purpose at work, it can be helpful to turn to outside interests. Hobbies or volunteering can fill your need for meaning, and they can also give you more energy to handle the stresses of your job. When Cammie was struggling with being misfit at work but had decided to continue with the company for personal reasons, Moe, in her coaching role, suggested to Cammie that she take part of the energy that she had been pouring into the job and put it into an outside activity. Moe advised that the satisfaction and learning opportunities that would result would actually decrease her sense of frustration from a less-than-perfect job. Cammie got involved with a nonprofit organization that was using art to raise awareness of issues impacting women around the world. She made new friends, learned new skills, and found a sense of purpose that carried over into a more positive attitude during the workday.

Flexing to Improve Job Fit

Job fit can actually be one of the easier elements to flex, especially at larger companies with a variety of positions and opportunities. Most jobs involve a mix of tasks we really enjoy and tasks we simply tolerate or manage to endure. Mike, an administrative assistant, loves to plan offsite meetings and events and handle special projects for his boss, but he dislikes constantly revising calendar appointments. Jude, a financial analyst, gets great satisfaction from creating models and doing forecasts, but she really dislikes negotiating with other functions or sitting in on weekly department meetings. It’s normal to dislike some parts of your job. And that’s not necessarily a sign that the job or organization is wrong for you.

Our experience with countless employees in a wide variety of roles has shown that it’s often possible – and usually helpful – to reshape a job in which you feel misfit by taking on more or fewer tasks, expanding or diminishing the scope of the tasks, or changing how the tasks are performed.

Dissect Your Work

Take time to examine your work carefully, reflecting on all the tasks you do, and consider which ones bring the most enjoyment and which cause the greatest dissatisfaction. Troy was feeling frustrated in his job as an HR recruiter because of his daily tasks. We suggested that he take a look at his job by first listing his tasks and then rating them high, medium, or low for how much time they took, how much he enjoyed them, and how he thought they were perceived by the organization. The results are shown in Figure 15-1.

In looking at his work this way, Troy realized that he was spending a lot of time managing the database of candidates and posting jobs because the technology infrastructure was inadequate for the task. He didn’t particularly like the work, but he especially didn’t like that it required so much of his time and energy. He wanted to create a better college recruiting program, such as he had done in a previous company, but that wasn’t something that his current organization had yet embraced. After doing the exercise, he decided to try to free up time and create more efficiency with his tasks by recommending that the department hire a data entry clerk to be shared across the recruiting organization. Then he built a business case for the benefit of a college recruiting program and offered to take on that responsibility.



Figure 15-1. Troy evaluated his job by first listing his tasks and then rating them high, medium, or low for how much time they took, how much he enjoyed them, and how he thought they were perceived by the organization. This reflection helped him break down disconnects between where he was spending time and what he enjoyed doing. The shaded job tasks show areas of misalignment.

We have included a similar exercise in Appendix 4, “Work Relationships Matrix.” This type of reflection helps you to break down disconnects between where you’re spending time and what you enjoy. Shifting time to the tasks you enjoy can significantly alter your overall sense of satisfaction and purpose.

Create Opportunity for Growth

Lack of job fit is frequently connected to feeling overqualified or to your job lacking in opportunities for growth. This is the time to take your development into your own hands. Talk to your boss about additional assignments or special projects. Sign up for committees or offer to help colleagues.

Ann is a nurse practitioner in an obstetrics-gynecology practice who has learned to create her own opportunities for growth. After several years in the job, she realized that, while she liked the work and her colleagues, the day-to-day tasks had become monotonous. “I wasn’t unhappy; it had just become routine and I felt stagnant. Learning new things is important to me.” She had heard many of the clinic’s patients complaining about sexual dysfunction and found the topic interesting and relevant to some of her previous studies. She decided that she could position herself as the team’s expert in this area. She took the initiative to sign up for extra training and attend several conferences, and then she talked to her boss about being the group’s specialist. “My boss was 100 percent supportive. He told me to take it as far as I wanted to and that the team would begin pointing to me as the expert. My colleagues have been thrilled to have the additional support. It makes me feel good to be helping them and helping women in the community. It has made me feel much better about my job.”

Strengthen Your Skills

Sometimes lack of job fit is connected to a sense of feeling unqualified to perform parts of your job. Feeling anxious about performance is never good. If this applies to you, focus on developing and shoring up your skills. There are many resources available to help you learn and build competence: find online courses in your field, go to a seminar, read more books, or watch inspiring TED talks. Commit time to start growing in your capabilities as a way to counteract any feelings of inadequacy.

Flexing to Improve Culture Fit

Culture fit can be among the most difficult of the work fit elements to flex – it’s that invisible force in an organization that defines “how we do things here.” Over the long term, it’s hard to fundamentally shift your values and personality if they’re out of sync with the practices of the organization. If you observe systemic behavior that’s inconsistent with your sense of integrity or involves abusive, unethical, or immoral activity, the answer is to leave as quickly as you can (and, in some cases, report transgressions to authorities). In the case of subtler cultural differences, however, it’s occasionally possible to improve culture fit, or at least to make adaptations that can enable you to hang on until you find a better opportunity.

Find Like-Minded Colleagues

We’ve noticed that even in extremely misfit cultural situations clients can usually find a few friends or allies. Having these relationships of trust not only helps you get more accomplished, it also provides moments of joy during long work weeks.

This was a strategy Bob used successfully when he found a lack of fit after taking a new job at a fast-growing software company. “My instincts told me it might not be the right culture, but the role provided an interesting new challenge and the company was growing quickly, so I told myself it was close enough. I should have explored the culture more. I quickly found that it was quite different from the well-established leading company where I had previously worked. More like the wild, wild west. There was lots of after-hours socializing and drinking. No manuals, no training, lack of any process. I lasted a year by focusing on building relationships and a good coalition with a group of more like-minded people, including the head of sales. I aligned myself with those people and then just focused on getting things done where I could and trying to get satisfaction from those moments while I looked for my next opportunity. I still count those allies as key friends and an important part of my network.”

Identify Behaviors That Might Be Causing Friction

Consider that some of your actions might be creating stress between you, your coworkers, and the organization you work for. When possible, view the behaviors not as right or wrong but simply as differences. For example, you might want to be trusted to make decisions on your own, but the organization requires a lot of consensus and data. Without fundamentally changing your independence, how can you embrace the value of consensus for now? Or can you attempt to discuss the differences with colleagues and your boss to strike a compromise?

Elizabeth was brought into a new company to create change in the organization. She quickly discovered that the culture was not a great fit. “The organization wasn’t very open to new ways of doing things. To make it more difficult, my boss, the CEO, was very introverted and not really focused on relationships. I wasn’t able to get much help from him. I had a financial need to stay, so I decided to try to make it work as long as I could. My nature is hard-charging and results-driven. I realized that I would need to be very collaborative and less territorial than might be my nature. I saw that I needed to build relationships and earn people’s trust.” Eventually, Elizabeth was able to make an impact on the business results. “Toward the end of my first year, we had a big internal meeting. When I saw the work that I had done being presented, I felt like ‘oh my gosh, pinch me, what I wanted to see happen is happening. I’m making a transformational impact.’”

Consider Style or Communication Adjustments

While you can’t easily change your natural working tendencies to fit a misaligned culture, you can become more conscious of how your behavior impacts others and make appropriate adjustments in order to make work more comfortable, satisfying, and productive. Assessment tools that we referred to in Chapter 12, “Knowing Yourself and What You Want,” such as Everything DiSC, Leadership Practices Inventory, and Strengths Finder, frequently include specific recommendations for how to better engage with people who have different work styles. Many of their suggestions can also be applied to adjusting to better fit with an organization’s culture. Developing new skills or modifying your approach can help to make interactions easier, which in turn can lead to less strain at work and better performance.

Elizabeth was able to flex in ways that made her original culture misfit manageable for the long term. For Bob, the presence of both style and values differences meant minimizing pain during the time it took to find a better job. Consider how you might flex, without compromising your values, in order to feel more comfortable and productive in a culture that’s not a natural fit.

Flexing to Improve Relationship Fit with Colleagues

As we noted in Chapter 6, “Relationship Fit,” our relationships at work are among the most critical factors of our job satisfaction. When those relationships are broken, we often feel misfit. Healthy relationships at work take effort to develop.

Analyze Your Relationships Objectively

It’s all too easy when you feel misfit at work to bring confirmation bias to every interaction. Even one bad relationship can impact your perception of your workplace if you allow it to happen. Try to set aside emotion and look impartially at all your individual relationships to get at the source of your frustration.

Get to Know Your Colleagues

The more you know someone, the more likely you are to find common ground. Ask colleagues to have coffee with you without any agenda beyond learning their story and sharing yours (be explicit about wanting to get to know them better for work). Listen to their needs and motivations at work. Focus on listening to understand them rather than first being understood. Try to find at least one common connection or interest.

Be Willing to Be Vulnerable

As Patrick Lencioni (2003) discusses in his book The Five Dysfunctions of a Team, openness about weaknesses and mistakes builds trust and cohesion. Try modeling this behavior. Be open and honest about your strengths, concerns, and vulnerabilities. Share a misstep with your colleagues openly and with humility.

Learn to Navigate Conflict

Develop fluency in having hard conversations and practice embracing conflict. The Harvard Negotiation Project offers many resources that will help you, such as their book Difficult Conversations: How to Discuss What Matters Most (Stone, Patton, and Heen 1999) and Crucial Conversations: Tools for Talking when the Stakes are High (Patterson et al. 2011).

Seek Out Like-Minded Colleagues

When you’re dealing with a difficult coworker, it helps to balance out the bad by seeking out the good. Look for people in the organization who share your passions and interests. You might find them through volunteering for activities with groups outside your department. It might help to become part of extracurricular work activities, such as the company softball team or a diversity network, so that you can meet new colleagues and make new connections. Having someone you look forward to going to lunch with can also make a major difference in your daily motivation and satisfaction.

Practice Empathy

Empathy is the ability to feel with and understand another. Nursing scholar Theresa Wiseman (2015) describes the practice of empathy as having four steps:

• See the world as others see it.

• Be nonjudgmental.

• Understand others’ feelings.

• Communicate your understanding of others’ feelings.

Empathy facilitates positive connection with others because, in the face of their human struggles, we can authentically convey “me too.”

Kim worked as a coordinator in an events-planning company. One coworker, Jane, was really challenging. Kim frequently felt that Jane was attacking her projects in front of other colleagues and their boss. Under attack, Kim began to have the feeling that everyone in her work group undervalued her contributions, and she suspected that people were talking about her behind her back. Whenever a colleague hesitated, or gave her critical feedback, she assumed that “this is happening because they just don’t like me,” and she frequently complained about other employees to members of the team. Kim’s reaction wasn’t productive or healthy – for herself or for her team. Poor behavior like Kim’s can cause further alienation in a tough work-fit scenario and create feelings of isolation and loneliness. When Kim evaluated the situation objectively, she recognized that her negative feelings were stemming primarily from this one colleague. She also recognized that the level of interaction was actually low and that this colleague had no experience in her job area. She also remembered that Jane had recently gone through a difficult divorce. To try to build some trust between them, she decided to set up a meeting to provide more background on what she and her team were currently working on. She hoped that increasing her colleague’s awareness of the group’s work would lead to better understanding and less criticism.

Being a good team member means bringing your best interpersonal skills to the table to create healthy, cohesive relationships that will help you to feel connected and like you belong.

In Appendix 4, “Work Relationships Matrix,” we have a framework that helped Kim think more objectively about her relationships at work. Try filling out the matrix for yourself. List important relationships (your boss, colleagues, and people who work for you). For each relationship, consider which colleagues are important to you in your role. Look also at those with whom you have low frequency of interaction, trust, or social comfort. Consider how you might invest in these relationships to improve the connection and partnership.

Flexing to Improve Relationship Fit with Your Boss

While dealing with difficult coworkers can be exhausting, misfit with your direct supervisor can be almost unbearable. As one of our friends says, “The boss is the culture.” Here are ideas we’ve seen garner the most success for employees suffering misfit due primarily to their boss.

Speak Up

Consider respectfully and in private giving your boss feedback about the impact they have on you. It’s possible that they haven’t received meaningful, direct feedback about their behavior from others, and that’s why their poor managerial behaviors continue. You need to have that difficult conversation with your boss that lets them know why you’re struggling together and what you hope for in the future?

Ask For What You Need

It’s highly likely that, in an effort to prove your own competence, you’ve locked up any needs you have, so that from the outside looking in you’re a rugged individualist. But when you’re feeling poor fit in your job, before you go you owe it to yourself to give every effort you can, including an honest and open ask about what you need, in order to be at your best. Marshall Goldsmith says, “We abuse self-sufficiency, ignoring the value of a supportive environment, taking foolish pride in doing it all ourselves. We trigger our isolation.”

Reflect on Why Your Boss is Pushing Your Buttons

Consider how you might be contributing to the situation. As we discussed before, certain people may just rub us the wrong way. Steve is, by his own admission, overly concerned about order and tidiness. So when his boss appears to be less tidy or orderly, Steve judges him harshly and gets annoyed. While the boss’s behavior may be imperfect, the person with the issue and frustration is Steve, due to his expectations and personal habits. Learning to accept the imperfections of other people will help Steve see his boss in a more comprehensive light, with less judgment and, therefore, less frustration.

Get Clear On Your Boss’s Expectations

Misaligned or murky work expectations are a leading cause of frustration for employees who are unhappy with their boss. Spend time probing and clarifying with your boss what exactly they’re looking for so that you, and they, can be satisfied that you meet the mark.

Practice Empathy

Can you try on your boss’s perspective without judging them? Can you use empathy to more deeply understand where they’re coming from in order to build genuine feeling for the world from their view? This may foster a more authentic connection between you.

If these strategies don’t improve your situation, and you enjoy other aspects of your work or the company, one of the most common strategies you can employ is to try to find work in another part of the organization. This is particularly effective if you’ve been with the organization long enough to have developed good relationships with employees in other departments.

This was the case with Rebecca. She worked for a large corporation that had several offices, and she had requested a move to the California office because of a personal need. The new boss was quite difficult and made it clear that Rebecca wasn’t the person he wanted for the job, even telling her that he really wanted to take another person but was forced to take her. She had evidently failed to respond quickly enough to a request he had made when she was in a previous role, and she was still on his “bad person list.” “I was sitting in his office, pregnant with my oldest, being yelled at. My first thought was, ‘Oh no, I just moved and I have to get out of here.’” She reached out to a trusted advisor whom she knew could be trusted with a plan to have her job moved to another group. Fortunately, this worked. She was able to move, and made it look like the idea came from elsewhere.

In particularly difficult situations where a boss-employee relationship has deteriorated, it’s important to document interactions and be prepared to voice concerns and solutions – first directly to the boss, and then to HR or others in the organization if the issues aren’t addressed.

Ultimately, you want to act like the leader that you wish the boss would be. Working for a bad boss can be a great way to sharpen your understanding of your own values and how you want to interact with others.

Flexing to Improve Lifestyle Fit

Misfit between work and outside responsibilities can be extremely painful and feel especially difficult to address. Many of us perceive a stigma around revealing our outside priorities. “Will they think I’m not dedicated? Will I be penalized in my performance review?” Because lifestyle misfit frequently happens with a change in our personal situation, it can be daunting to shift behavior or ask for a change in work circumstances that were previously not an issue.

For many clients, a lifestyle misfit has eventually led to a change in employer or job to one that better met their personal needs. But before you assume that you need to make that change, it’s worth considering opportunities to flex within your current situation.

Honestly Assess What You Need

Thoughtfully consider what you need and/or desire right now for better balance in your life. Think about the specifics of what would be helpful. Ideas that we’ve seen work include:

• Tighter boundaries between work and personal time (e.g., less pressure to answer emails or phone calls after hours)

• An opportunity to work from home (How many days would make a difference?)

• Reduced hours

• A change in schedule (e.g., starting and leaving earlier or a compressed four-day workweek)

• Time off to take care of personal needs (Vacation? Sabbatical? Personal leave?)

Do Your Homework

Are there examples within your work group or in the company that appear to be working for others that might work for you? It can be useful to talk to HR about policies and appropriate working styles that already exist in your company as well as lessons they’ve learned on what’s worked for others and what hasn’t.

Create a Proposal

Talk to your boss about a specific plan for how you might improve your lifestyle fit and still deliver value to the company. Remember to communicate how your plan can be beneficial to the employer – don’t just focus on your own needs. Listen carefully to your boss’s perspective and concerns. If your boss is extremely hesitant, propose a trial period so that you can both evaluate how the plan is working. Agree on success metrics, and show that you can outperform those metrics in the ways that are important.

Practice Self-Care

Getting a good night’s sleep, exercising, and eating right are frequently cast aside when we’re under the stress of juggling too many responsibilities. Find out if your employer has an employee assistance program and consider using its services to talk to a counselor.

Learn to Say No

To improve your balance, it’s critical that you ruthlessly prioritize outside commitments and learn to say no. Brian Andreas, the innovative author and illustrator of Story People, says it well: “Everything changed the day she figured out there was exactly enough time for the important things in her life.”

Bella had worked for a bank for many years in customer service. She loved the people and the job, so when her husband retired and wanted to move two hours away, she felt torn. Bella wasn’t opposed to some commuting, and she had family she could stay with, so she approached her boss and asked to work a compressed schedule of 40 hours in three days. She prepared for the conversation, built her case, and made it clear that she wanted to stay but had to have more flexibility. Her boss suggested instead that they try having her work from her new home three days a week and commute to the office two days. This type of arrangement had never been done, and it required both new technical support from the bank and new behaviors from Bella and her colleagues, who weren’t used to a remote work situation. In Bella’s words, “I was nervous about what people would think, and it took some adjustment, but it has worked out great. The trust that I had built over the years really paid off. I’m so glad that I spoke up and asked for what I needed rather than just assumed that I needed to quit.”

Flexing to Improve Financial Fit

Most of us would like a bigger paycheck. It’s easy to mentally spend an extra 10 percent on things that feel like they would improve our lives! But financial misfit isn’t just about desiring more pay, it’s about feeling that we’re not being appropriately compensated for the work we’re doing or that our work is not paying enough to meet our basic needs.

Kathy joined her company as the HR manager of one manufacturing plant. Over a three-year period, the scope of her job increased as she secured HR managers at four different plants, elevating her to the role of director, in which she oversaw people development company-wide. She was given a standard pay increase annually, but when she benchmarked her salary using PayScale, she realized that while the scope of her job had increased significantly, as had her responsibilities, her pay had not. After some careful preparation, Kathy approached her boss with data and an open mind. “I was nervous about talking to them, since I had grown with the company and felt worried it was ‘not my place’ to demand a higher salary. At the same time, I wanted to be compensated fairly relative to my peers, and I felt the pressures of the higher position.” Her boss appreciated the benchmarking data and agreed that her salary should increase commensurate with her responsibility, and they crafted a staged plan to raise it substantially to match her title of director. Kathy felt seen and valued after her pay was increased, and she’s able to continue in her role feeling that she’s respected and treated fairly.

Here are some tips for how you might negotiate if, like Kathy, you feel that you’re not being properly compensated for your work.

Stay Objective and Check the Facts

In our experience, it’s critical to manage the almost inevitable anger that accompanies feeling underpaid. Do some honest assessment: do you have the same experience, responsibility, and skill set as your colleagues, who you believe are making more?

Prepare a List of Your Accomplishments

Reflect on and document what you’ve achieved in your job: money saved, customers satisfied, people managed, revenue created, sales closed.

Practice the Conversation

Having a conversation about not being properly compensated for your work can be difficult and emotional. Before tackling it “for real,” try practicing on a trusted friend or colleague. This will help you refine your communication and present your case in the most effective fashion.

Bring Your Concerns to Your Boss

When you talk to your boss, avoid the kind of confrontational stance that will put them on the defensive. Communicate confidently but in a way that shows your commitment to the company and to achieving goals together. Acknowledge that you understand that there are a lot of different factors that go into determining salary, but that you’ve recently found some information that causes you concern. Approach the conversation as a request for information, feedback, and understanding rather than as a firm request for a raise.

Be Thoughtful About Timing

While it may seem natural to bring up financial concerns during your annual review, it may actually be better to do it before the formal review process begins. The discussion can be especially appropriate after you successfully complete a major project or when you’re asked to take on additional responsibilities.

Consider Other Forms of “Pay”

As an alternative to asking for a salary increase, think about additional currencies such as more vacation, additional training, or a bonus. These may be easier for your boss to approve and will help to address your sense of inequity.

No for Now

If the answer is “no” – consider taking it as “no for now” and ask what it might take to get to a future “yes.”

If your feelings of financial misfit are stemming from financial need rather than a sense of inequity, you’ll likely need a longer-term approach. Talk to your boss about additional training or skills that can increase your value to the company. Investigate opportunities to gain certifications or build skills through local education programs or online classes. And in the meantime, try to reduce spending on non-essentials so that your pay and your financial requirements are a better match.

Create a Flex Action Plan

While you might have a long list of ways that you don’t fit in your company, don’t try to change too many things at once. Gradual change will be easier for you to accomplish and less likely to be met with suspicion or opposition from others. Think about breaking in new behavior just as you would break in a new pair of shoes.

After developing a list of possible actions, reflect on the ones that feel like an expansion of who you are rather than a departure. This can become a time to develop new skills that can help you even outside of work relationships. You might sign up for a training class, ask your boss for more specific feedback on development opportunities, improve a relationship with a difficult colleague, or ask for flexibility to shift your schedule.

ASK YOURSELF . . .

• Am I truly committed to putting the time and energy into changing my behavior?

• Can I do so in a way that’s not detrimental to my fundamental character and strengths?

• If I change this area, will I be more effective in my role?



It’s easier to change behavior when you set clear and specific goals. For example, “I will be more innovative” is too general and much less likely to be accomplished than “For the next three months I will read a newsletter in my industry every week and write down an idea my department could leverage.” Goals should be clear, specific, and measurable. They also should be important to you as well as something you can commit to accomplishing.

Recognize your limitations and be honest about whether the payoff is worth the effort to make the change, or whether it’s simply too inconsistent with your natural style and desires.

Creating a written plan with goals and milestones will be an important and effective way to track progress and ensure that you’re headed in the right direction. Also, flexing is hard work and will require a strong support system. You are much more likely to be successful if you cultivate relationships with trusted people who can provide feedback and who can also help you to stay objective about just how far you want to go to try to fit in.

Your boss can be an important ally, particularly if you can frame your goals as part of a development plan to make you more effective at your job. Your boss can provide ongoing assessment and feedback by directly observing your behavior. For example, you might struggle with the need to spend large amounts of time gaining consensus from colleagues in other departments and prefer a more autonomous environment. Your boss, who knows that developing relationships with these colleagues will benefit you and the organization, can see that you’re given help in improving your consensus-building skills and provide an ongoing assessment of your improvement.

A trusted mentor or coach is an ideal partner with whom you can be honest about your full situation – both your commitment to make changes and your concerns about the ultimate fit. They can help hold you accountable as you try new skills and behaviors.

It’s also important to confide in a trusted friend or family member and solicit their emotional support. Fitting a round peg in a square hole can be exhausting. It helps to have someone who can provide moral support and encouragement and who will recognize your achievements along the way.



Figure 15-2. Use this template to create your own flex plan.

The template in Figure 15-2 will help you create an effective flex plan.

Focusing on those aspects of the job that are fully within your control, such as rebuilding your confidence, reconnecting to what matters to you, improving relationships, and recrafting tasks, is a logical starting point when you feel misfit at work but aren’t ready or able to make a job change quickly. Many people have expressed to us that by using the ideas described in this chapter, they were frequently able to stay in their jobs longer than they expected, reduced stress related to poor fit, and, in many cases, created long-term satisfaction that resulted, over time, in a positive fit for them in their companies.





