1 Understanding Fit

People who love their work bring an intensity and enthusiasm that is impossible to match through sheer diligence.

— Gretchen Rubin, The Happiness Project

JOHN REACHED OVER and pushed the snooze button once again. It’s been getting harder and harder to get out of bed in the morning. He has a big presentation today and a meeting with his boss, and he’s dreading both. The job seemed perfect at first, but in two years it’s deteriorated to the point where John wonders if he should update his resume and start looking for a new job. His team is functioning poorly and their results are poor. Tension is high between John and his boss because their values are no longer in sync. He doesn’t want to share these problems with his wife because he knows she’ll worry. There aren’t a lot of jobs in his field in their town; they just moved his wife’s mother to a nursing home nearby, and John feels increasingly trapped. Slowly he drags himself out of bed, dreading another day.

Just about everyone can relate to John, occasionally feeling dissatisfied, frustrated, and even disillusioned with the company they work for. John really hoped to fit at his company, and to happily retire from there one day. Instead, he’s checked out, looking for a job elsewhere, and clearly not bringing his A game to his current work. John’s stress level is high, and it’s starting to show in his relationships at home. What had started out as a match made in heaven – the perfect job – has exploded into a burned-out executive and a job search, expensive for both John and his company.

It’s a familiar tale. In more than thirty years of consulting to organizations and leading teams, we’ve heard story after story of genuine anguish and frustration from people who suffer in jobs and companies that aren’t right for them.

Everyone deserves to love their job, and it starts with having a great fit between you and the organization where you work. But, as we said earlier, finding a great fit is neither simple nor easy.

You’re Not Alone

If you find yourself struggling with fit at work or longing for more meaning in your job, you’re not alone. According to The Conference Board Job Satisfaction Survey (Kan et al. 2016), less than half of U.S. workers are satisfied with their jobs. And a recent Gallup study revealed that only a third of workers say that they’re engaged in their current job (Rigoni and Nelson 2016). Unfortunately, instead of pursuing the belief that everyone deserves to be happy and fulfilled in a job for which they’re a great fit, many people just give up on the pursuit of job satisfaction, buying into the false belief that work is just a necessary evil, something you have to do to pay the bills.

Why do so many of us simply accept unhappiness and dissatisfaction as natural elements of work? How do people end up in companies that rob them of satisfaction and even joy? Why do they stay? What are the costs for people and organizations of poor fit alignment? What measures can be taken to increase the odds of landing at a company that’s the right fit for you? What should you do if you’re suffering at work because of misfit?

We started asking a lot of questions in preparing to write this book. And we found a lot of answers. We found survey data, research, real-world stories, tools, and exercises that not only shed light on why so much unhappiness exists but also on what people – people like you – can do about it. Through our years of experience in consulting to and leading organizations, combined with our research of more than 500 people and over 50 interviews, we’ve culled potent stories of fit and misfit, as well as trends that shaped our thinking. You’ll hear the voices of the people we talked with throughout the book. We also offer ideas and inspiration that will help you take heart and keep searching for a job that’s the right one for you at your particular stage of life. There’s a company out there that’s a great match for you, and when you find it both you and your organization will benefit.

What Is Work Fit?

We define work fit as the degree to which a job with a particular company fits you – how well the job’s requirements and the company’s values and culture mesh with your expectations, values, personality, and skills. Broadly speaking, it’s the match between an employee and the company for which they work. A great fit at work is akin to that perfect pair of jeans that goes on easy and makes you feel good in your own skin. We know it when we find it, but the search is often long and frustrating, and many employees in the United States and around the world haven’t found it, settling instead into jobs they keep for financial motivation – but little else.

It’s critical to emphasize that great work fit isn’t about looking alike or being part of the same social group, class, race, or gender, often called “fitting in.” It’s about having a common set of values, desires, and expectations that allow you to bring your best self to work.

When work fit is poor, a job feels like this, said Stacy: “The role was lacking in any opportunities for growth or even a lateral move. There was zero flexibility and employees were micro-managed – phone calls were listened to and timed, and even bathroom breaks were timed. It felt like a people factory, not a team environment. It felt like I was punching a time clock and my contributions and ideas didn’t matter.” And Andrea said, “Every day felt like ‘damned if you do, damned if you don’t’ because it seemed like nothing I did was ever enough to please my management. In one case, this happened even when I did as much as I could with as few resources as possible.”

Figure 1-1 is a word cloud showing what people said about poor work fit, or misfit, in a survey we conducted.

When work fit is great, a job feels like this, said Billye: “I have felt pleasure in my job since the beginning. The joy and pleasure of the work made the difficulties easier. I share beauty with the world; I’m a salesperson and I love, admire, and appreciate what I sell. I feel that I’m helping to enable people who create beauty to make money and sell a product that gives joy and long-term pleasure.”



Figure 1-1. This word cloud depicts what respondents said about poor work fit, or misfit, in a survey conducted by the authors.

Figure 1-2 is a word cloud that shows how our survey respondents felt about great work fit.

ASK YOURSELF . . .

• Have I had a work experience that was a great fit? What was it like?

• How did I know?

• Which words from either word cloud resonate with me and why?

• What have been the implications for my happiness, health, and well-being at work and at home when I’ve been in a great work fit or misfit situation?





Figure 1-2. This word cloud depicts what respondents said about great work fit in a survey conducted by the authors.

Everyone Needs – and Deserves – Great Work Fit

People are not machines. As humans, we’re hardwired to garner a personal sense of value and purpose through our work. Standard thinking about human needs places meaningful work, which is connected to self-esteem and self-actualization, near the top of the ladder, behind physiological and safety needs. Current researchers and thinkers have elevated connection to others, engagement, and contribution as even more basic to our humanity, closer to our most basic needs for food and shelter.

Researcher, author, and TED notable Brené Brown (2010) emphasizes the importance of wholeheartedness (the capacity to engage in our lives with authenticity). She says that connection and belonging – both of which are needs we bring to the places we work – are as important as other basic human needs. Similarly, Patrick Lencioni (2002), blockbuster author on teams and organizations, suggests that, more than anything else at work, people crave being seen and valued and feeling like they contribute to work that matters (in any role at any level).

Healthy workplaces and great fit between employee and employer are critical to activating great performance and powerful human connections. We believe that everyone can enjoy great work fit, but finding the right match is challenging since people and workplaces are unique.

Professionals in the United States and worldwide spend a great deal of time at work – more than they do sleeping, eating, playing, engaging in household activities, or with family and friends (U.S. Department of Labor 2014). For many of us today, a large number of our needs must be met in the workplaces we join, so happiness in life largely correlates to happiness at work. When you feel good at work, you have energy and the capacity for creativity and partnership. This in turn creates a virtuous cycle in which the better you feel, the more you contribute to work results. People are drawn to partner with you, and together you get things done well.

Changing jobs is exhausting, but the toll taken from continuing in an environment that’s a misfit is incredibly high. Poor work fit erodes employee health and well-being, which leads to stress-related illness, stress on families, and stress among coworkers. We know that stress manifests itself in chronic long-term illnesses such as heart disease, diabetes, anxiety and depression, alcohol and drug abuse, and cancer. It also results in fractured family and community systems. These trends affect the health of employees, their quality of life, their relationships at home, and their efficacy in the communities in which they live.

A Better Way - The Virtuous Work Cycle

When you enjoy and feel successful at something – a hobby, a sport, a relationship – you look forward to it and want to devote time and energy to doing it well. And it’s certainly the case with work. When you love the work you’re doing, when it truly uses your skills and experiences in a positive way, it creates a virtuous cycle (see Figure 1-3). Because you enjoy your job, you don’t mind working hard, and you’re able to tackle challenges with confidence and enthusiasm. Your peers and bosses can see that you’re going the extra mile to solve issues and generate ideas, and in turn they respond positively to your efforts. Simply put, the more you like your work the better work you do, the more positive feedback you receive, and the greater your enjoyment becomes.

The evidence, as well as our own experience, confirms that feeling good about work leads to better performance and greater success. Research by Jessica Pryce-Jones (2010) reveals that people who are happy at work:

• Get promoted more

• Earn more

• Get more support

• Generate better and more creative ideas

• Achieve goals faster

• Interact better with colleagues and bosses

• Receive superior reviews

• Learn more

• Achieve greater success

It makes sense – when you’re happy and at ease you tend to be more productive. You’re more open to learning new things and less frustrated by obstacles and challenges. This confidence means that you make fewer mistakes, and that you’re more likely to learn from them. You can view problems as opportunities for growth rather than reinforcement of all the things that are wrong. When you’re in a virtuous work cycle, relationships with coworkers and superiors go more smoothly. We’re naturally attracted to people who enjoy what they’re doing, and we’re more likely to give them support or to seek out their input and involvement.

This happiness and sense of purpose spills out into our personal lives. Indeed, the connection between feelings about our work and satisfaction with our overall lives is supported by hundreds of articles and academic dissertations going back to the mid-1930s. One of the most far-reaching studies occurred in the 1970s, when Angus Campbell at the Institute for Social Research at the University of Michigan undertook a massive research project to understand how Americans defined the quality of their life experiences (marriage, parenting, health, etc.) and the impact of those experiences on the quality of their lives overall. Campbell found that satisfaction with work was one of the strongest predictors of overall well-being, accounting for almost a fifth of the variance among those who reported a high satisfaction with life and those who did not. Satisfaction with work was more important than satisfaction with finances and friendships, and equally important as satisfaction with family life (Campbell, Converse, and Rodgers 1976).



Figure 1-3. The virtuous work cycle is the result of loving your work.

Organizations Need Great Work Fit

The costs of poor work fit are staggering. When an employee leaves after only a short employment stint, that vacancy leaves a wake of destruction. Many studies have shown that the total cost of losing an employee can range from tens of thousands of dollars to twice that person’s annual salary (Bersin 2013). The cost of an employee leaving is astonishing.

But when employees stay in poor work fit situations the cost is even greater. It’s expensive enough to replace an employee who leaves, but imagine what it costs when an underperforming employee doesn’t leave but simply lingers on for years. By some estimates the loss of productivity due to employee disengagement costs between $450 billion and $550 billion per year in the United States alone (Gallup 2013).

Companies large and small simply do better when their employees are thriving. They make more money, accomplish their missions, produce more, engage happier customers, create less waste, make better innovations, and develop more productive vendor and partner alliances. For the foreseeable future, the human capital of organizations – the employees – will be the main factor in determining which companies will endure and which will churn and burn. Thus, it’s good for business to ensure a good match between the employees and the culture of the organization. Period.

There Is a Path to the Right Fit

Take heart: great work fit is possible. There’s a great fit for every job seeker and job provider; we know it ourselves and we’ve seen it happen for other people and other organizations.

Throughout these pages we’ll share practical advice, reflective exercises, and real-world stories designed to help you advance your understanding of great work fit and how you can achieve it. We’ll talk about the importance of getting to know yourself – and how you can go about doing just that. We’ll explain the six essential elements of work fit, and we’ll discuss how your prioritization of these elements changes over the course of your career, and how to weight them for yourself. And we’ll look at how everyone can – and must – handle work misfit.

The Six Elements of Work Fit

We’ve identified six essential elements of work fit (see Figure 1-4). While it’s unlikely that all of these elements are great at any point in time, we need at least some of them to be working well in order to feel that we fit well in our organization.



Figure 1-4. At least some of these elements of work fit need to be working well in order to feel that you fit well in your organization.

1. Meaning Fit – Meaning fit is great when you feel that what you do matters.

2. Job Fit – Job fit is great when the responsibilities of your job align with your talents and provide opportunities for growth.

3. Culture Fit – Culture fit is great when your values and beliefs are compatible with the practices of your employer.

4. Relationship Fit – Relationship fit is great when you like and respect the people you work with and receive appropriate support and trust to do your job.

5. Lifestyle Fit – Lifestyle fit is great when your life outside of work is supported by your employer’s policies and practices.

6. Financial Fit – Financial fit is great when you feel that you’re paid fairly and when what your employer offers (salary, bonus, benefits, perks, and allowances) meets your needs.

It takes effort to find the path to great fit – and to stay on it. For many of you it begins with asking the question, “How well do I fit in my current situation?” Or, “Am I thriving here?” Chapter 2 will assist you in recognizing whether you’re a misfit today and start you on the path to great work fit.

It’s time for a new way to work that’s compatible with human health, well-being, and satisfaction, and is also good for business and productivity. Suffering in a job should not be an essential part of anyone’s career path. Accordingly, we have created The Fit Manifesto (see Figure 1-5) as a guide and inspiration for individuals and organizations committed to ensuring great fit between people and their organizations.



Figure 1-5. The Fit Manifesto is a guide and inspiration for individuals and organizations committed to ensuring great fit between people and their organizations.





