16 Deciding to Leave and Going Gracefully

Call it what you will, but quitting a strategy, or a job, should not be seen as failure. We can’t win at everything we do.

— Robert Herjavec

THERE COMES A POINT when you just have to admit that it’s time to go. Maybe you’ve tried to adjust your style, your perspective, and your job tasks and you’re still misfit. Maybe the pain of being in the wrong place or working for the wrong person has finally outweighed the commitment you feel to your colleagues or team. Maybe you can no longer deny that the job is negatively affecting your health or personal relationships. For whatever reason, there’s a time to simply say this job isn’t a good fit for me, I can’t change that, and it’s time to move on.

For some people, the decision to leave can be reached fairly easily. We’ve talked to clients who enjoyed aspects of their jobs and valued the relationships with their teams or peers but lacked the opportunity to grow. When a job with more attractive prospects came up it was a no-brainer for them to make the switch. Often, they did so with the blessings of their boss and colleagues. Clients who didn’t feel a strong connection at work were quick to jump on what felt like a better financial or lifestyle fit. We’ve also seen people who were so miserable, usually because of deep culture misfit, that they simply felt they had no choice but to go and go fast.

More often, however, individuals who recognize that it’s time to move on find it difficult to make the change. There can be tangible obstacles such as geographic and financial constraints. But often the reasons are more emotional. In some cases, these individuals are in prestigious organizations and feel like they’ll lose credibility if they exit. This is particularly true if the realization of misfit comes early and they fear being labeled as job-hoppers or fear leaving without achieving measurable results. It can be difficult, especially for high achievers, to admit that the job’s not working. Quitting can feel like giving up rather than moving on. There may be pressure from friends or family to stick it out. Sometimes people begin to think that the problem is with them rather than with the organization. Mario said, “It was guilt inducing. I felt incompetent and as though I had failed. It impacted me greatly.”

We’ve seen many people who convince themselves that their misfit situation is normal – or at least that it’s as good as it gets. A clear sign that this may be happening is when you find yourself responding to inquiries about how work is going with phrases like “Well, nobody really likes their job, do they?” or “I guess my job is no worse than anybody else’s.” Even bad situations can feel more comfortable than the discomfort associated with looking for a new job or being out of work. Aidan said it this way: “It’s always stressful to feel that you’re giving up on anything . . . as well as quitting a company. And there’s so much that’s terrifying in the unknowns.”

Many times we’ve seen people stay in painful situations because they have a strong sense of loyalty to their teams or colleagues. This can be especially true if they’ve recruited other people into the company. Moving on can bring about tremendous feelings of guilt if we feel like we’re abandoning people we care about. We feel guilty for “jumping ship.” Daniel Gulati, co-author of Passion and Purpose, suggests that even people in gravely unsatisfying jobs don’t quit because of a tendency to overthink decisions, fear eventual failure, and prioritize near-term, visible rewards over long-range success (Coleman 2012, Gladding 2011, Gray 1999, Pychyl 2009).

Acknowledging that you’re in pain is hard. Taking action to change your circumstances can be even harder. It may help to recognize that over the course of your working life you’re likely to switch jobs multiple times. Sometimes it may be due to misfit and sometimes to better opportunities or changes in your personal or professional goals. This isn’t a new trend. The average employee in their 50s has already held 11.7 jobs (U.S. Department of Labor 2015). And the Millennial generation is poised to change jobs even more frequently, largely in pursuit of better fit. If you’ve decided that the best option is a work change, resist the temptation to feel bad about going. Remember that it’s a natural part of the evolution of your work life. Focus on the chance to use your experience and earned wisdom for a more fulfilling job.

In his job as a web designer with a startup, Aaron faced the challenge of admitting it was time to go. “My first experience with work misfit reminded me of an unhealthy relationship. I knew some major things were wrong, but I kept telling myself that the (dwindling) things that were going right would somehow be enough. At the time, I didn’t have a clear enough understanding of how my values related to work, so there was no way to measure the current experience against other possibilities. I told myself that it must be grass-is-greener thinking, and I stayed about two years longer than I should have. Leaving the company was a leap of faith and (eventually) a confidence builder. About a year after the move, I was able to effectively retrospect on my previous job and my personal values. I found that I learned just as much about myself and what I need as I did about why that wasn’t the right fit for me.”

Quitting Well

Quitting well takes a combination of courage and honest self-assessment. We found that it’s helpful to balance your emotions with tools and outside perspectives that will help you to think objectively about your situation. Here are some ideas that have been helpful to others.

Take a Self-Assessment

Consider taking an assessment such as the one that we have included in Appendix 5, “Is It Time to Leave? Assessment” from Amy Wrzesniewski, Professor of Organizational Behavior at the Yale School of Management. Her research explores how people make meaning of their work, with a focus on the impact that meaning has on employees and the organizations in which they work. Doing this type of exercise can help you to break through stories you may be telling yourself about the need to stay and lead you to a better understanding of the reality you’re facing.

Seek an Outside Perspective

Find a confidante outside of work who can serve as a sounding board. Sharing your feelings out loud will likely give you a new perspective, and a friend can give you an honest assessment of how the situation is affecting you. You may also earn their support for the journey ahead.

Envision the Future

Visualize yourself giving notice. How does it make you feel? One client calls it the stomach test. If you start to feel sick and anxious, then you might have some more work to do before you’re ready to leave. If you feel a sense of relief and joy, then it’s obviously time to move on.

Re-examine Your Circumstances

Reality-check the specifics of your situation. By talking to others and assessing yourself objectively you can gain perspective on how serious the situation is for you right now. This frequently necessitates some difficult conversations, possibly with your boss.

This was the case with Rebecca, who found herself needing to confront her boss. “I had never had a bad relationship with a boss before – really ever, which is kind of amazing because I’ve had a 20-plus-year career. But at this job, no matter what I did, I felt that my boss held me in disdain and barely tolerated my feeble attempts at managing my team in a direction he wanted to go. Added to this was a crushing commute that consumed over two hours of my day. I finally worked up the courage to confront my boss and tell him how unhappy I was. I told him I was at a fork in the road, and if he and the company really didn’t value my contribution, I needed to leave. If they did actually value my talent, then I needed to better understand what I was doing right because everything I did seemed like it was wrong in their eyes (though I was personally very proud of my team’s and my accomplishments). He ultimately came back and fired me with a severance package. Though I was surprised at first, on the day that I left the building I felt immense relief. I would almost call it giddy. I don’t think I really understood how unhappy I was until I was released from that toxic environment. Even though I had no job lined up, which would normally have stressed me out, I felt like God had given me a gift and a huge blessing. It took me a few months to re-center myself since the whole experience had challenged my paradigm about myself. I believed that I was competent, talented, and could be successful in any environment – as I had proven over and over earlier in my career. What it taught me was that sometimes, no matter how hard you try, you may be in an environment where you just don’t fit, and it’s no one’s fault necessarily . . . but that doesn’t mean you should stay there. I won’t hang on so long if there’s a next time.”

ASK YOURSELF . . .

• What indications do I have that it’s time to exit?

• What might be holding me back?

• How might I get more comfortable with the decision to leave?



Making Your Exit

Regardless of the circumstances around your departure, there are things you can do to leave with as much assurance and dignity as possible.

Prepare Yourself

As soon as you make the decision to leave, start marketing yourself for your next opportunity. Through the work you’ve done in earlier chapters, especially Chapter 12, “Knowing Yourself and What You Want,” you should have a good sense of the type of job and organization that will be the best match and provide the most satisfaction for you. As you polish your resume and LinkedIn profile, emphasize the experiences and skills that have brought you fulfillment. Use the strategies in Chapter 17, “Evaluating New Opportunities,” to identify the companies that look to be a good match, and start to network with employees at these companies. While it’s important to expand your network, be selective about who you talk with about your search. You don’t want a difficult situation in your current job to get even tenser because people know that you’re looking.

Leave Toward Something

According to career experts, it’s much easier to find a new job when you’re still employed. It’s also much easier to explain a move when you can share a specific new opportunity with your old boss and company. But that’s not always possible. Sometimes you need to leave even when you don’t know what’s happening next.

Even without your next job lined up, it’s possible to leave toward something and to have a message for your current colleagues that will be respected and understood. Explain that your passions and interests are pulling you in a new direction. Many organizations appreciate hearing that you don’t want to give less than your best while you’re looking for a new opportunity. Keep your comments positive, try to express gratitude for what the company has done for you, and acknowledge the personal learning or growth you experienced (there’s always learning, even in tough or stagnant environments). If you have an opportunity to do an exit interview, tell the truth about your experience and issues with the boss, culture, compensation, etc. in order to help the company learn. But keep your tone as positive and helpful as possible.

Go with Grace

When the time comes to share the news of your leaving, strive to maintain positive relationships with those in your current company. Explain your reasoning and try to help make the transition easy. This means no slamming doors on the way out. Remember that even in misfit situations there are likely to be relationships that you’ll want to maintain. We’ve heard countless stories of connections that resurfaced elsewhere that were helpful.

Ensure a Smooth Transition

Give everyone adequate time to prepare for your departure. Two weeks is often not enough notice. Senior roles require three to four weeks’ notice. Try to finish up projects where possible and leave detailed notes to help the person who will be taking on your responsibilities. Offer your replacement or former team the opportunity to reach out if they need help. If they welcome your help, check in with your replacement once a week until you’re not needed anymore.

Exiting was a long process of for Barb. She had been unhappy with her relationship with her boss for more than a year because of their very different work styles. But when she at last secured a job that felt like a better fit, it was high season at her job. She didn’t want to leave her employer in the lurch, so she agreed to stay on until they could hire her replacement. She was able to overlap a few weeks in order to start her replacement’s training, despite her eagerness to start her new role. Her new job, fundraising at a nonprofit, required interfacing with many of the same people she worked with at her old job, so Barb worked hard to exit with grace. She never spoke poorly about her boss, and she actively maintained positive relationships even after she left. Both companies were delighted with her work, even the one she left. Her patience, calm, and empathy for the challenges left in her wake at her former employer facilitated an open and positive exit. “To this day, I feel pride in how I left. I’m happy that despite the challenges I worked hard to keep my actions and my attitude positive.”

ASK YOURSELF . . .

• What would a positive transition look like for me?

• What steps can I take to ensure a graceful exit?



Leaving a job, particularly one you had high hopes for, can be draining. It’s like giving up a dream or a bit of yourself. But time and time again what we hear from people who have taken that step is a sense of relief and the seeds of new joy:

• Leaving the job felt like a breath of fresh air, a huge weight lifted off my shoulders, and a step in the right direction to pursuing my dreams.

• When it’s a misfit, you dread the thought of going to work. I didn’t like feeling like a quitter when I left. Afterwards, though, it felt like a giant weight had been lifted from my shoulders.

• Accepting that things were not going to change, and that I could not succeed within that environment, was a long and painful process. Leaving was such an incredible relief.

• It was exhilarating, a huge stress relief – seemed like I saved myself ten extra years to live.

• It feels like a new beginning, and I’m planning for new opportunities down the road.

• It was a huge relief to feel like I could be myself again.

• Leaving was like breaking open from a cage and seeing the sun again.

Could one of these voices be yours?





