Fit Matters How to Love Your Job by Moe Carrick




“Fit Matters offers hope, inspiration, and practical tools for finding joy, meaning, and engagement at work.”

— Daniel Pink, author of Drive and To Sell Is Human

“A must-read for anyone looking for their next amazing opportunity or who wants to tweak their current situation to make the fit just a bit better.”

— Pat Wadors, SVP, Global Talent Organization, LinkedIn

“Carrick and Dunaway’s book powerfully illustrates the importance of ‘getting in where you fit in’ if you want to flourish at work. While many people think they understand opportunity-fit, this book will reveal surprising categories of job-fit that must all be taken into account. Read this book if you want to find the career of your dreams, not the bane of your existence.”

— Tim Sanders, New York Times bestselling author of Love is The Killer App: How To Win Business and Influence Friends “We should all love our jobs – and what Carrick and Dunaway prove is that we all can. This isn’t a soft option – it means everyone has to bring their A game to work every day. But when they do, work fulfills its great ambition: the fulfillment of human life.”

— Margaret Heffernan, author of Beyond Measure and A Bigger Prize

“You can be happy, even joyous, in your job if it’s the right fit. By showing you how to tap into your core professional and personal values, Fit Matters is your can’t-miss guide to great career satisfaction!”

— Marshall Goldsmith, New York Times bestselling author of Triggers “Imagine working for a company that has the culture and environment that allows you to bring your “Best Self” to work. STOP imagining, leverage the wisdom and tools in Fit Matters, and get closer to your best self. The book is also a great guide for managers and leaders who want to build world-class teams!”

— Annie Young-Scrivner, EVP, Starbucks and Board of Directors, Macy’s Inc.

“Finding the right fit at work can be truly life changing – opening up a path to greater joy, impact, and success. Carrick and Dunaway have developed an excellent guide to identifying that right fit and making it happen, with practical tips to help each step of the way. If you want to make a change to increase your happiness and achieve your full potential, then Fit Matters is the book for you.”

— Jen Dulski, CEO, Change.org

“Whether you are mid-career, retired and contemplating what’s next, or just starting out, this guidebook is a great choice to help find a role that brings you true joy. Full of practical, pivotal, and pithy advice and actionable assessments to discover your path from purpose to fulfillment.”

— Denny Post, CEO and President, Red Robin

“Finding a good match is just as important for the employee as it is for the employer. As an employee, when you find your fit you deliver the best results and create attractive growth and career opportunities. For organizations, finding the right employees is key to accomplishing the company’s mission, vision, values, and giving you your best business performance. Fit Matters shows you how.”

— Xavier Lopez Ancona, Founder and CEO, KidZania

“Fit matters. When the fit isn’t there it impacts many factors, one of the most important is centered around inclusion. When you don’t feel like a true member of the team due to fit you are often made to feel like an outsider. When one feels like an outsider it can impact our self-esteem, self-confidence, and, over time, can impact our performance impact. Before taking on a new job, do your homework. Don’t take the job if there is a mis-alignment to what is important to you. Fit Matters offers inspiration and ideas for ensuring that you find positive work fit.”

— Michelle Clements, Vice President, Human Resources, Seattle University

“Few decisions in life are more important than finding a great fit for your professional life. It should be no surprise that the most effective leaders I find are the ones who truly love what they do. Your team, your customers, and even your family will know when you find a great match and are passionate about your work. Why wait? This timely book offers wonderful advice on how to thrive at work. A must read!”

— Greg Welch, Sr. Partner at the executive search firm Spencer Stuart

“Our happiness as humans is what drives our desire to achieve more which makes it crucial to find the right fit in any career. Cammie and Moe did a superb job in breaking this down into more than just a book, but a handbook you can keep with you to create a meaningful approach to loving what you do.”

— Bryan Kramer, TED Speaker, author of Shareology and Human to Human: #H2H

“I believe that fit is one of the most important and least understood aspects of work. It can make the difference between extraordinary success and satisfaction, or unexpected derailment and discontent. Today, when we expect employees to own their careers, recognizing what you personally need in order to thrive is essential. This book helps unlock some of the mystery and provides practical advice that will help people make better, more informed decisions about the opportunities they choose to pursue.”

— Sekhar Ramaswamy, Chief Talent Officer, Prudential Financial

“Being demoralized at work is one of the most life sapping experiences people can face – we spend inordinate amounts of time and mental energy doing our work and if the fit isn’t right, our lives often don’t work well overall. Understanding what a great fit looks like and how to find yourself in that place will undoubtedly energize, revitalize, and make you a happier and more empowered person. This book will be the guide for your journey.”

— Shannon Stowell, President and CEO of the Adventure Travel Trade Association “It is unfortunate how many people are disengaged at work. We live in a time where you can work a company that aligns with your values and sense of purpose and your work is no longer a job but rather a calling. This is a profound difference, which authors Carrick and Dunaway understand completely. Fit Matters provides the road map for your great work fit!”

— Scott Allan, General Manager Hydroflask

“Fit Matters is a must-read for anyone trying to build out a values-based and culture-laden team, as well as those seeking out a job with personal and professional purpose and meaning.”

— Scott M. Davis, Chief Growth Officer, Prophet Consulting

“I learned while leading the People Department at Southwest Airlines the power of working where your personality and values fit the company culture. When that happens, work feels more like life versus drudgery. Following the inspirational advice of Carrick and Dunaway will lead to a more purposeful life and a fulfilling career.”

— Libby Sartain, author HR from the Heart and Brand from the Inside “Moe Carrick and Cammie Dunaway are masterful in offering practical and inspiring guidance on what it takes to thrive at work in a role that fits. Their recipe of six essential elements is a time-tested resource you can turn to again and again.”

— Virginia Klamon, Ph.D., Executive Leadership Coach and Business Owner





Published by Maven House Press, 4 Snead Ct., Palmyra, VA 22963; 610.883.7988; www.mavenhousepress.com.

Special discounts on bulk quantities of Maven House Press books are available to corporations, professional associations, and other organizations. For details contact the publisher.



Copyright ©2017 by Moe Carrick and Cammie Dunaway. All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in or introduced into a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means (electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise) without either the prior permission of the publisher or authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to the Copyright Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923; 978.750.8400; fax 978.646.8600; or on the web at www.copyright.com.

While this publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in regard to the subject matter covered, it is sold with the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering legal, accounting, or other professional service. If legal advice or other expert assistance is required, the services of a competent professional person should be sought. — From the Declaration of Principles jointly adopted by a Committee of the American Bar Association and a Committee of Publishers and Associations

Library of Congress Control Number: 2017900165

ePUB ISBN: 978-1-938548-75-8

10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1





DEDICATION




To everyone suffering at work with misery and discontent, we offer hope: there is a workplace for you.

Carry on, because your gifts and talents matter somewhere.

To the organizational leaders that strive to create workplaces fit for human life – thank you. Your reward is people who come to work everyday bringing their highest and best to your workplace, which as you know, is so very worth it.

And for our children and their children:

may your work challenge you, touch your heart and excite your mind on more days than not.





To see takes time. — Georgia O’Keefe






ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS



WE BOTH FEEL CHANGED by the process of writing this book. We entered it naïve to the world of publishing but activated about the possibility of helping more people thrive at work. The journey has been at times arduous and, simultaneously, wondrous. Our North Star has been our shared conviction that people can and should thrive at work, not suffer or simply count time. Human beings all over the world need to work for a whole host of reasons, including our basic human desire to contribute to something bigger than ourselves – to matter.

Right at the top of the list of people to thank are our families. They put up with countless weekend and evening hours of us tied to the computer and on the phone digging and learning when we could have been spending time with them. They have each encouraged us and humored us by listening to sections, talking through structure, and applauding our efforts even when we were struggling. Their unconditional support of us has mattered more than anything. Lendy, Jim, Ian, Davis, Cam, and Hannah – thank you. And our parents, Margaret Vaughn and Dan Luechauer, Pat and Richard Whisnant, we thank you for providing the faith and confidence in us individually since we were tiny girls that we could do it, whatever it was. Your love and belief in us has always made a difference.

Our journey has brought hundreds of stories into our lives of individuals struggling to find a job that makes their heart sing as well as those who get up every day excited about going to work. To the hundreds of people we interviewed and surveyed, we thank you so much for sharing your stories with us. It helped shape and affirm our thinking and our approach, and we recognize how deeply personal your experiences have been. Understanding your journeys has mattered greatly to our creation of this book.

Our reader team provided countless hours of document review and edits – thank you for your wisdom, candor, and feedback: Jason Zazzi, Deborah Holstein, Sarah Marsh, Jim Morris, Barbara McAfee, Marietta Cozzi, Sekhar Ramaswanmy, Ron Fritz, Nick Besbee, Barbara Lish, Anita Bhasin, Joan Perry, Jacki Ross, Krista Calvo, Michelle Clemens, Virgina Klamon, Rebecca Perry, Kim Moon, and Darren Pleasance. And special thanks to Ian Carrick, Cameron Carrick, and Lori King for their special help with research and editing at crucial junctures in our process when we needed an extra lift and pair of hands. This work is better for what you brought.

From the beginning we were graced with the faith and optimism of our amazing agent, Kelli Christiansen. Thank you for believing in us and helping us stay buoyed in the face of rejection. You are so good at what you do, and we have benefited hugely from your wisdom. Our Publisher and Editor, Jim Pennypacker of Maven House Press, and his team provided countless patient words of wisdom throughout the process of bringing this book forward. Your grace and patience, combined with your absolute surety that we had something good to say to the world, has made this process truly joyful.

And finally, thank you to our clients and employers both past and present. It is through our work with you that we have seen, firsthand, what great work fit looks like and how it feels when it is nonexistent or not a priority. Each of you, alongside employers everywhere, are the ones who set the tone and the stage for bringing out the absolute best in each person who works for you or in creating disengaged people. This privilege is gargantuan, and we thank you for showing us the myriad opportunities and pitfalls inherent in the employer/employee relationship.





FOREWORD



AS HEAD OF HR FOR LINKEDIN, I care deeply about how we find and attract amazing talent for our company. Not just any talented person will thrive at LinkedIn – we seek people who are right for us, and whose motivation, needs, interests, and skills are suited for what we have to offer. As an employer, it benefits us to spend time and energy carefully assessing the nature of the right fit with each candidate. This is hard, because we, like most companies, often want to sell the role or the company, and yet experience shows us that the effort of assessing fit will ensure the best success for us and the potential employee. In addition, when we have candidates who clearly know themselves and are prepared to evaluate us as an employer that will bring out their best, it’s much easier to place them in roles, teams, and environments where they will thrive.

Fit does matter! You deserve to love your job and bring your best authentic self to work every day. Companies benefit when each person who works there is highly engaged and aligned with the organization’s purpose and culture. When the fit is right, there’s real joy for the employee and a tangible business upside in both individual and team performance.

Despite our best efforts, we sometimes get it wrong. Employers in general must get it wrong a lot because a recent Gallup study revealed that only a third of workers say that they’re engaged in their current job (Rigoni and Nelson 2016). The risks are high that any employer, including LinkedIn, will hire the wrong person in the wrong job or in the wrong company at the wrong time. When this happens, it’s expensive in time, energy, and mindset for everyone. There are so many things that come into play to make the right fit – timing, experience, personality, financial needs, passion, background, lifestyle requirements, social style, and motivation, to name a few. I believe that even though getting it right is complex and not always a straight shot, we all deserve to be happy and successful where we work, and companies deserve to have engaged and motivated employees bringing their best every day.

I appreciate the work that Carrick and Dunaway have done in this book to untangle the algorithm for finding fit. Fit Matters: How to Love Your Job is pragmatic in its approach and helps all of us to evaluate ourselves and our needs for work in order to up the odds that we can secure a workplace that suits us well. The authors share the relationship between six essential elements of fit, explore the dynamic and interrelated nature of those elements, and help you to measure your fit as a critical step in enhancing your current job or landing the right job for you. Their practical and honest frameworks opened up my thinking and gave me new ways to evaluate real fit. Some of it was intuitive, but the authors’ research and stories added a much richer level of awareness for me as a leader. I found insights and questions that will serve me well on our path at LinkedIn to assessing candidate fit, as well as help me to think about my own fit and that of my employees at every job stage.

I believe this book will help employers and employees, as well as job seekers, to increase their work satisfaction, engagement, and happiness. Thank you to Carrick and Dunaway for their wisdom and insight. The stories in the book enlivened the approach for me, and I think everyone will find themselves somewhere in the pages, which I hope will provide hope, reassurance, and ideas. This is a must-read for anyone looking for their next amazing opportunity or who wants to tweak their current situation to make the fit just a bit better.

Work is such an important part of our lives, and at LinkedIn, we seek to connect the world’s professionals to make them more productive and successful. Ensuring that the job you take is a great fit for you is key to becoming effective, successful, and content. I highly recommend this book for your fit journey at work!

Pat Wadors

Senior Vice President

Global Talent Organization

LinkedIn





PREFACE



THE FACT THAT YOU PICKED UP THIS BOOK means that something about your current work fit may be calling for your attention. Perhaps you’re in a job that looks great on the outside, but day in and day out you’re struggling. Or maybe you’re just now entering the workforce and want to find the perfect place to add value. Possibly you dream of a different work experience that meets more of your personal needs. Maybe you’re a coach, an HR (human resources) professional, manager, or recruiter who helps people define and secure their right job. Or maybe you just have a nagging feeling that there could be a more fulfilling option out there that’s better than your current work-life situation.

Most of us spend a lot of time at our jobs. We spend more hours in any given week earning a living than just about anything else: sleeping, eating, playing, creating, exercising, parenting, dreaming, or gardening.

When our jobs fulfill us, we thrive. But when our jobs fail us, we languish.

That’s why this book matters, and why we wrote it. We know from our personal and professional experience that the match between employee and employer matters in tangible and intangible ways that are far more comprehensive, important, and material than can ever be measured. What would happen for all of us, and for the world, if more people actually loved their jobs?

We met in a professional situation that had at its center a workplace misfit. Cammie, in a significant job change, joined Nintendo of America in what looked from the outside to be the perfect situation: Executive Vice President of Sales and Marketing. In her capacity as a coach to the executive team of the company, Moe began to work with Cammie to help her integrate with the team and lead her huge division. At first the job seemed a match made in heaven. Cammie entered as an experienced leader with big ideas for innovation and expanding the company’s reach to new consumers. The work was stimulating and the team welcoming and supportive. But over time cracks started to appear.

Coming from Silicon Valley, Cammie was used to running an agile organization where team members could experiment without fear. She thrives in environments that encourage open and rigorous debate around new ideas and the empowerment of team members.

What she began to observe at Nintendo was a very cautious approach to building relationships. There was a system of rigorous checks and balances that reduced the chance of a bad decision, but seemed painfully slow compared to the nimble culture to which she was accustomed. Subtle differences in how decisions were made and performance was evaluated began to discomfit Cammie. She saw things one way, and sometimes it seemed that she was alone among the executives in her viewpoint. Her confidence in her ability to be heard and to make an impact waned. At first, she told herself that she was the problem, and that if she just worked harder to fit in and adjust, it would work out. She didn’t want to feel like a quitter. Plus, she had good friends at work and the company made amazing products. But the harder she tried to shift her style, the harder the work became and the less passion she had for the job. Despite the dream that this job would be a career capstone for her, she finally acknowledged (with the help of Moe, her coach) that staying was exacting too high a price and that it was time to move on. Leaving her job in just three years wasn’t the outcome she expected, but Cammie knew as soon as she made the decision that it was right. She went on to find a better work fit and the result was higher satisfaction, more daily joy, and, ultimately, better results for Cammie and her new organization.

In her thirty-plus years consulting to organizations and individuals, Moe has encountered case after case of job misery – people who find that their daily world of work has become, in essence, a fortress of struggle, dissatisfaction, low esteem, unhappiness, and drudgery. They often revealed stories of disillusionment and pain, frequently with an opening sentence such as, “I feel like such a failure that it’s not working out for me here.” The stories revealed countless negative impacts, ranging from poor physical health to shattered families, from sleepless nights to overwhelming worry and fear.

From the employer’s point of view, countless company leaders we’ve known over the years have talked about the costs of misfit in a key role. These leaders faced mountainous challenges in realigning people, finding new talent, and recruiting the perfect-fit employee – only to have them leave too soon.

When a job isn’t right for you, you suffer, your family suffers, your community suffers, your company suffers – even the world at large suffers. Stress rises and performance falls, resulting in lower-quality work and performance, which affects the bottom line in a not-so-virtuous cycle of dissatisfaction and diminishment (ADAA 2006).

We believe that there’s a better way, which is why we wrote this book.

The process for finding a great work fit is neither easy nor simple. Most of us spend precious little time understanding and considering fit when we take a job, which often costs us time, energy, and job satisfaction down the line. We propose that work fit is dynamic and temporal. That it consists of six essential elements, where fit expands and contracts for each of the elements based on what stage of life you’re in. Understanding the relationship between these elements of fit, and developing resilience in assessing and measuring your fit in each of them, is key to landing the right job for you.

Our combined research, life experiences, and conversations with employees, bosses, and company owners have convinced us that the world will be better when work fit is a high priority for both employee and employer. And perhaps more importantly to you, a great work fit will enliven your days, improve your outlook, and remind you of your unique and valuable contributions.

In this book, we offer what we believe is a key ingredient for work that’s essential for you today and tomorrow: hope. The hope that, for most of the days you spend working, you’ll feel good. The hope that meaning and value and contribution will be yours more often than not, resulting in greater alignment, satisfaction, and joy.

To get there you need to know yourself deeply, and you need to know how to assess the unique qualities that organizations possess. Looking beyond the marketing buzz of best places to work, we lay out a pragmatic and personalized method for you to discover what will work for you, with which company, at which time in your life. The world has big problems to solve, and organizations will play a big role in solving them by having the right people in the right jobs. So let’s dig in and find the right fit for you.

Note: We’ve included Ask Yourself boxes to help you get the most out of this book. We suggest you keep a notebook or an open page on your tablet or computer to reflect on these questions and track your progress.





ASK YOURSELF


• Why did I pick up this book?

• How do I feel about my current work situation?

• How clear am I on understanding my own strengths, needs, and weaknesses?

• What is it that I want to learn more about or discover regarding work fit?





