3 Meaning Fit

The key question to keep asking is, are you spending your time on the right things? Because time is all you have.

— Randy Pausch

MEANING MATTERS. The need to feel connected to a genuine and important purpose is fundamental to our overall human existence and is a critical element of truly loving your work. Doing what you love and following your passion works for some of us, some of the time. But for most of us, most of the time, the issue of meaning is more fundamental and reflects deeper issues than simple passion. Meaning fit, which we describe as knowing deep inside that what we do matters, is not only a crucial element to work fit, but also to overall human existence. Victor Frankl (1959), in his best-selling book, Man’s Search for Meaning, concludes that meaning is at the very core of humanity’s will to survive.

In the post-industrial age of service, professional, and information economies, meaning is increasingly becoming a primary element of the choices we make in our vocation. And many researchers conclude that, for young people (Millennials and the yet to be characterized Generation Z), the element of meaning in our work has risen to the top.

It makes sense to us. Belongingness and contributing to something that matters are basic human needs. A 2015 Fast Company story stated that “more than 50 percent of Millennials say they would take a pay cut to find work that matches their values, while 90 percent want to use their skills for good.” We all seek ways to matter.

Nevertheless, many of us have yet to feel that potent and rewarding connection to purpose. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, four out of ten Americans have not yet discovered a satisfying sense of their purpose. Nearly a quarter of all Americans report feeling neutral or don’t have a sense of what makes their lives meaningful. We believe that work itself can provide limitless opportunities to find meaning and purpose, and our research shows that the search for meaning in work is a significant driver for many people today. There is copious evidence that having a purpose and meaning increases our well-being. As Emila Esfahani Smith (2013) said in her article in The Atlantic, “Research has shown that having purpose and meaning in life increases overall well-being and life satisfaction, improves mental and physical health, enhances resiliency, enhances self-esteem, and decreases the chances of depression.”

In our interviews, people’s faces lit up when they talked about their jobs where they felt great fit for meaning. Often, once they got talking, we found ourselves basking in the delight of their joy, energy, and enthusiasm for doing work that mattered to them. As Hillary said, “It feels amazing to hear about the future of the company and know that I’ll be a part of that future. I’ve found a place where I want to belong and I’m so thankful that I do.”

In every job held by any human being, a connection to work that’s seen by others and makes a difference is important. No matter how entry-level the work, we simply do better when we feel as if the effort we’re making makes a difference to someone. It can be as simple as a supervisor who notices the extra effort we put in, or a CEO who gives us accountability and room to innovate.

Moe tells a story of discovering a higher purpose in a summer job as a hospital janitor. She learned just how important her somewhat dull and redundant work was when a patient died of an illness she contracted while in the hospital for a routine appendectomy. When Moe’s boss explained to her how Mrs. Johnson had died, he reinforced that this was why it mattered so much that cleaning materials were applied in the correct order – bacteria and germs were complex and easy to miss when the application was careless. Moe felt a renewed sense of purpose, commitment, energy, and pride in the work, despite its drudgery.



Figure 3-1. There are four interconnected aspects of meaning that affect work fit.

ASK YOURSELF . . .

• In what ways do I feel that what I do makes a difference?

• What aspects of my work contribute to my sense of meaning?

• Work is a means to an end for most of us – what motivates me to work?



We have noticed four interconnected aspects of meaning that affect work fit (see Figure 3-1).

You Feel Seen – You bring something unique to your work.

Feeling seen means that the organization you join actually cares about you. Not the generic you, the person with the training and experience to simply fill the job, but the actual you, by name, with the unique synthesis of qualities and insights that will add unique value to the role. Our human need to belong is tightly connected to our feeling seen at work. John, an engineer at a large solar inverter company, shared this painful experience of not feeling seen:

I started my new job full of hope and excitement. As a new engineering grad, I longed to make a difference by joining a renewable energy company. Within my first three months, I wrenched my back at work, meaning I was out for six weeks on disability leave. To my surprise, beyond the routine HR call about my return date, no one reached out to me when I was out. And even worse, when I came back to work, no one even seemed to notice that I had been gone. People on my team just assigned work as if it was my first day, no one asked how I was feeling, and I felt that the work I had started before I left had been completely abandoned. I knew then that I was just a cog in the wheel of essentially an engineering sweatshop. They didn’t need me, with my unique ideas and value; they just needed someone (anyone) to crank out the formulas. I looked for a new job within days of my return.

Feeling seen doesn’t always happen automatically. In addition to a genuine interest in you from others, there are things you can do to create more connection with other people at work, including your boss, that will help you feel seen and be seen. For example, try to practice sharing yourself openly at work with others. For private people this can feel challenging, but it’s an important step to being seen and valued. Ask yourself, “What might other people want to know about me that would create more connection and, therefore, trust?” If you go first, others will often follow your lead and share about themselves in a more open fashion.

You Feel Necessary – What you do matters to someone and has an impact.

Do you remember your first job? For many of us it was during high school, when we were motivated by simply having pocket change to spend on our teenage interests. This first job often arrived accidentally and wasn’t related to a cause we cared about. With little forethought as to whether our efforts mattered, we often caught on once things got going. Susan told us, “Serving coffee at a local shop near my high school, I grew to love the regulars. One customer told me, after a few weeks of coming in to sit at my table, that he loved seeing my smiling face. I learned that his wife had recently passed, and they used to come together to the shop. I began to feel how wonderful it felt that to one person it mattered how I did my job because it brightened his day.”

For many of the people we interviewed, the context of their work – the why – mattered more than we could have imagined. Oftentimes, you can shift how you feel about being necessary simply by understanding the context of your work, your boss, and your coworkers. Sometimes more research is needed to see how your daily tasks affect an actual human being. When Carletta worked as a billing training specialist at a cellular company, she felt demoralized by the work at times because it seemed difficult to convey to customer service agents why the billing system mattered. She asked to visit customers, and heard story after story of how the new billing system streamlined their understanding of costs related to the new technology and supported their buy-in to the actual costs of cellular to their business. Armed with the impact the system had on real people, she found it more energizing and compelling to train users on the system.

It’s critical that you put energy into understanding the context of what you do and the impact it has on actual human beings or processes. Doing so increases your feeling of mattering to the end product or mission. If you don’t understand the role you play, and to whom it matters, consider this exercise:

ASK YOURSELF . . .

• How would I describe the relevance of my role?

• Do I feel necessary? Why or why not?



You Feel Occupied – Engagement increases when you feel seen and necessary.

Engagement is a popular buzzword for organizations as a measure of the extent to which employees feel connected to and stimulated by the company they work for. Have you ever had a job where you watched the clock tick minute by minute? The odds are that if you said yes, you were marginally engaged at work. When we feel occupied, the time seems to fly by! And when we don’t, we find ourselves surfing the web for job opportunities, fantasizing about better opportunities, and seeking make-work projects. Meaning is greatly elevated when we feel fully occupied by the work at hand.

There’s much written about the role engagement plays in organizational success. But the role it plays for the individual is less frequently studied and considered. One of the things we do know is that when we feel only partially occupied by the work we do, we’re functioning at less than full capacity. This dynamic means that, in many cases, we’re not working to our full potential, and we leave talent, ideas, and innovation on the table. This contributes to us feeling increasingly invisible and unseen in our roles. As Barbara said about her work, “I know I could have brought more value to the job, but, frankly, I found myself mostly planning personal vacations in my head during down time at work. I would feel guilty, but I just couldn’t find ways to think deeply about work – it mattered so little to me.”

ASK YOURSELF . . .

• Do I feel proud when I talk about my company and job?

• What do I look forward to accomplishing at work?



You Feel Compelled – Your organization’s products or mission are important to you; you can get behind them.

Increasingly, the element of meaning in work fit relates to the value, mission, and impact of the organization itself. Having a higher-order purpose – a contribution to the world, be it social, environmental, or simply producing an innovative product that makes lives better – draws employees who connect to that purpose and keeps them in the organization longer. Whether it’s Starbucks’ mission of “inspiring and nurturing the human spirit, one person, one cup, and one neighborhood at a time,” Nike’s mission of “bringing inspiration and innovation to every athlete in the world,” or the Rocky Mountain Institute’s vision of a world “verdant, thriving, and secure for all, forever,” feeling good about why your employer and your job exist matters to us more and more. Sometimes it’s not the mission of the organization that’s compelling, but the nature of the role itself. Jill feels compelled; she said, “My job, even if small, is connected to larger social impact.” Sinek (2009) speaks powerfully about this dynamic in his popular book and TED talk, Start with Why. He says “If you hire people just because they can do a job, they’ll work for your money. But if you hire people who believe what you believe, they’ll work for you with blood and sweat and tears.”

Meaning matters to everyone at work, in every role. From factory work to C-suite, the ability to understand why your part at work matters is essential. Mario said it this way, “I know all I do is serve pizza. But people come in here tired after a long day and seeking a hot, delicious meal for comfort. They feel better when they leave, so I’ve done my job!” Barry Schwartz points out in his book How We Work the flaws in assuming either that a) only some jobs are actually meaningful or b) people will only want to work for a paycheck. He maintains that all jobs can compel human beings to strive, to sweat, and to risk.

Your Unique Purpose

Your purpose is not so much about what you do for work. It’s more nuanced than that – it has to do with how you do your job and, even more importantly, why. Wrapped into your personal purpose at work are critical aspects of your identity, what makes you uniquely you. As Nick Craig and Scott Snook (2014) say in their article “From Purpose to Impact,” “Although you may express your purpose in different ways in different contexts, it’s what everyone close to you recognizes as uniquely you and would miss most if you were gone.”

Reflecting back on your life to date, notice common threads and major themes. What consistently appears for you – lifelong interests, values, activities, and things that brought you pleasure? Go all the way back to childhood, before you had the pressures of what you should or shouldn’t do. Think about the adversity or challenges you’ve faced and what techniques you used to navigate your way through them. Search for unifying threads and write them down. This exercise will help you to discern patterns and consistencies that may provide insight into the kinds of work that has brought you a sense of purpose throughout your life. Many of us have not thought about this aspect of work fit before, which may mean that we haven’t examined what sense of purpose drives us. Looking for trends may provide clues to your own unique sense of purpose in your work, which is instrumental to finding great meaning fit in a job.

A software developer, Phil had been struggling with articulating what he felt his purpose was at work until he landed on the phrase, “I make complex things easier for average people to use at work.” He was at times daunted by the endless coding facing him each week, but found new energy and hope by this simple articulated purpose. Phil used this as a type of mantra on a daily basis to focus his work.

Can you create a statement that expresses your purpose at work today?

Assess Your Meaning Fit

Intuition plays a huge role in our assessment of meaning fit at work. Spending time considering what it is that matters to you in the context of the impact of the work itself, the value your contribution has, the extent to which you’ll be seen, or the compelling motivation for the organization’s mission or purpose will assist you considerably in your search for an organization that satiates your human need for meaning. No matter what type of work you seek, pay attention to understanding what about the work or your part in it that makes you feel good and makes a difference and you’ll be well on your way to satisfying your need for meaning. Use Checklist 3-1 as a reference as you progress in finding meaning fit and loving your job. We’ll provide these checklists throughout this book to help you assess your work fit.

When it comes to loving your job, the meaning derived from doing it is an invisible, but critical, dimension of fit. In large and small ways, the context of the work you do and the meaning you derive from contributing provide deep satisfaction. All of us long to feel seen, necessary, occupied, and compelled. Sure, we can survive jobs where we lack feeling an inner purpose. But over the long term, our personal fulfillment is powerfully connected to our inner sense of purpose. Our work is one of the most fertile gardens for us to discover and cultivate ways to meet our basic human needs to contribute and to be seen.



Checklist 3-1. Check all of the statements above that apply to you. Use the checklist as a reference as you progress in finding meaning fit. You’ll return to your answers in a final assessment of your work fit in Chapter 13.





