10 How Fit Impacts People

Half of our waking lives is a terrible thing to waste.

— Barry Schwartz

IT’S A SIMPLE AND POWERFUL TRUTH: how we earn our living impacts far more than our bank account. Work shapes how we define ourselves and greatly influences how much we enjoy our lives. From our earliest years, we role-play future careers as firefighters, teachers, and construction workers. We spend years in school preparing for future professions. As adults, the first question we’re likely to ask a new acquaintance is, “So what do you do?” When we lose a job, even one we didn’t particularly enjoy, it strikes deeply at our sense of identity. Conversely, when we find a job we love, we gain joy and confidence, which spills over into other parts of our lives. Work is fundamental to our lives, and what we need from our work is, ultimately, more than a paycheck.

Given how much time we spend there, it’s no surprise that our work is so intertwined with our self-image and emotional health. During a typical weekday, we spend more time working then we do sleeping and far more time than we spend eating, pursuing leisure or household activities, or caring for others (U.S. Department of Labor 2014). We spend almost as many hours a week with work colleagues as we do with family and far more than we do with friends. When we feel good about how we spend our time at work we thrive, but if work is dull or painful, if we feel unengaged or experience low trust, we’re drained and inevitably suffer. Our friend Christina describes her work life this way:

“Work misfit was like a slow, inexorable slide into a deep, gray blah. I felt like something was wrong with me. How can I be earning so much money and still be so miserable? Why am I pouring liquor into my leftover coffee while I sit in non-moving traffic on my way home each day? Is this normal? Does everyone feel this way? Can this really be life?”

While we may recognize a general feeling of discontent, many of us fail to realize just how deeply work satisfaction and fit can impact our physical and emotional health. We convince ourselves that our circumstances are normal, or that we just have to keep trudging through them. We don’t like to think of ourselves as quitters. Certainly there are times when sticking with a difficult situation can teach us resilience and help us to develop new skills, but it’s critical to be aware of hitting that point where the pain far outweighs any gain.

Krista experienced the pain of misfit in her job at a large Internet company. “It was traumatic. While I was in the job, I tried working harder, but no amount of time was enough. I would become depressed on Sunday nights as I dreaded going back to work on Monday. It seemed that nothing I did was quite right and I could never satisfy my stakeholders or myself. It really messed with my self-confidence. I felt as though I was failing and blamed myself. I spent a lot of time afterwards wondering why it didn’t work, what I had done wrong, etc. Even though it was my decision to leave, I felt the sense of not having been successful for a long time afterwards. It’s only after working to better understand my strengths that I can see that it was a fit problem instead of a personal failing.”

Misfit and The Work Cycle of Doom

In our research we’ve heard Krista’s story play out time and time again. Misfit and the ensuing crisis of confidence frequently lead to what we call the work cycle of doom. When you feel unhappy at work you typically find it more difficult to motivate yourself, which often results in lower productivity. When you don’t like your job, every molehill looks like a mountain. It becomes difficult to fix any problem without agonizing over it or complaining about it first. This is usually noticed by colleagues and peers. When you feel angry or resentful about your circumstances, it typically creeps through into your attitude and behaviors, with symptoms such as low energy, passive-aggressive reactions, and lack of teamwork. This leads to negative feedback, criticism, and lack of support, which create even stronger feelings of misfit. Essentially, this work cycle of doom is the flip side of the virtuous work cycle described in Chapter 1, “Understanding Fit” (see Figure 1-3).



Figure 10-1. The work cycle of doom is the flip side of the virtuous work cycle (see Figure 1-3).

One of our survey respondents discusses her own cycle of doom: “The misfit affected everything: my level of engagement, my desire for professional growth, my relationship with my coworkers, my personal life. With little to no guidance and just an emphasis on doing my current job with fewer and fewer resources and support, I had to do my own professional development, growth, and networking. Obviously, doing that on my own led me to pursue other jobs. Leaving the job and my old team was a difficult decision, but it was the right one.”

Lack of fit doesn’t always result in needing to leave. Even in the face of misfit, it’s possible to achieve work goals and develop positive relationships with hard work and deliberate actions. But these achievements are extremely difficult to attain and the effort typically creates significant stress. We’ve observed people who, despite misfit, kept up strong performance at work only to find that they were paying a significant price in other areas of their lives.

ASK YOURSELF . . .

• Can I recall a time when I entered a cycle of doom at work?

• What were the circumstances?

• How did I feel?

• How did I perform?



Work Fit Impacts Those We Care About Most

When our performance and emotions suffer at work, we frequently try to compartmentalize. Essentially, we say to ourselves, “I don’t like my job but I’ll just keep that separate from the rest of my life.” This is possible for some people, some of the time. As we’ll discuss in Chapter 15, “Flexing to Fit Where You Are,” investing time in enriching activities outside of work can be a strategy for handling a misfit situation. Unfortunately, this tends to be a short-term solution. Just as in the proverbial story about the person who gets kicked at work only to go home and kick the dog, it’s difficult to put away bad feelings when we leave the office, and it’s even harder if we’ve spent all day at work hiding our unhappiness.

Typically, unhappiness at work spreads like wildfire, carrying over to our other activities and our other relationships. When most of our time is spent doing something that brings us down, or when we don’t feel appreciated for the work we’re doing, it’s difficult to leave that pain at the office.

Deborah took a job at an established company to manage a new team that was formed mostly of employees from a recent acquisition. She was really excited about having the chance to fully leverage her experience in online marketing and customer relationships to make a big difference in the business. “Most of my team was in Denmark, and I was in California. I underestimated how difficult that would be. I was traveling all the time, and when I was at home my meetings all started at 7 a.m. To compensate I just kept trying harder. The stress took a high toll on my health and my family life. Feeling unhappy and uncomfortable at work, I was constantly trying to change myself to fit in while also feeling hopeless that it could ever get better. It was physically and emotionally exhausting. One Sunday night, as I was leaving for yet another overseas trip, my husband said, ‘You are miserable and you are making us miserable.’ I had not wanted to admit how much my lack of fit was impacting my family. I had eleven hours on the plane to think about it, and pretty soon after I quit the job.”

When we’re unhappy at work, our frustration and bitterness unconsciously seep into conversations with the people to whom we’re closest. We need a place to vent these difficult emotions, but “you won’t believe what my boss did this time” becomes dull if it’s always the main topic. On the other hand, some people work hard to shelter friends and family from any suggestion that work isn’t going well, only to slowly feel frustrated that they can’t share their true emotions.

Friends and family want us to experience joy. They want to see us valued for what we do best. When work is going well, they celebrate with us, and when it’s going poorly, they suffer as well. We can typically see this and give the right advice if a friend or spouse is in a misfit situation, but it’s often more difficult to acknowledge it in ourselves. One marketing executive we interviewed said that when she’s struggling with misfit, she steps back and considers what advice she would give her daughter if she were the one dealing with the situation. This exercise helps her to gain perspective on her situation and consider her options.

ASK YOURSELF . . .

• How does work fit affect my relationships with friends and family?

• When work isn’t going well, what’s the impact?

• If I’m struggling with misfit, what advice would I give to a friend in a similar situation?



Fit Impacts Our Health

One of the greatest long-term risks of staying in a job that doesn’t fit is the impact it may have on your health. Numerous studies validate the significant relationship between work, stress, and health. Simply put, if you’re in an ongoing work situation that’s negative or stressful, you’re more likely to suffer health problems. Even moderate amounts of stress can cause body pain, difficulty sleeping, and weight gain. High stress contributes to anxiety and depression, serious conditions that undermine daily functioning and health. Studies suggest that individuals who don’t like their jobs are more prone to getting sick, even contracting serious ailments such as ulcers, cancer, and diabetes.

A decade-long research study of work culture, work-life fit, and health, funded by the National Institutes of Health, found that workers in supportive, flexible environments show half the risk of cardiovascular disease, significantly lower levels of stress, higher job satisfaction, and better physical and mental health (Work, Family and Health Network 2015). They sleep and exercise more, they’re more likely to go to a doctor if they’re sick, and they spend more time with their children. While we hope and believe that many employers are waking up to the importance of helping employees manage the levels of stress in their jobs, it will ultimately be up to you to recognize what’s happening with your health and seek the changes needed to improve or protect it.

Steve experienced the impact that job stress and misfit can have on health in a dramatic way. When his small solar startup was acquired by a larger organization, it seemed like the capstone of his successful career and an opportunity for accessing greater resources for his team and their products. What he found was that he had landed in a cold, impersonal culture focused solely on profits. He was expected to lay off dozens of loyal employees and was publicly criticized by management for speaking honestly about issues. Because he had a lucrative retention contract he endured as well as he could – navigating between trying to stay true to his core values while being forced to implement decisions he vehemently opposed. The day his contract expired he quit, excited to finally spend time with his family. Instead he found himself barely able to get out of bed, incapacitated by mood swings and low energy. He was eventually diagnosed with a thyroid problem caused by chronic stress, and he’s still in therapy dealing with post-traumatic stress disorder. “At work I was like a warrior putting on my armor every day. I was under so much stress for so long. What I failed to realize is that I would pay such a high price. I’ll be paying it for a long time to come.”

Good health is a powerful force in our ability to fully enjoy life. Like many things, it’s something we frequently take for granted until it’s threatened. We certainly can’t enjoy our work if we’re constantly battling aches and pains or feeling tired or anxious. We may not always connect the dots between misfit and the costs of medication, therapy, work-related injuries, and alcoholism, but those costs are very real.

ASK YOURSELF . . .

• If work is a misfit, what costs am I paying?

• What are those costs to my relationships, confidence, health, energy, self-esteem, and sleep?



Over the course of our working lives, we’ll all face situations where we don’t love our jobs. In some instances, it may be temporary, or it may be remedied by small changes. But if we lack motivation week after week, we need to make a change. In our research, those experiencing deep misfit described their situations as disheartening, demoralizing, agonizing, and stressful. These words represent real pain and real cost. The psychological impact of poor performance reviews, the toll of anxiety, depression, or poor health, are likely to come at a far greater cost than the paycheck we’re putting in the bank. When we minimize these impacts, we denigrate our own well-being. “I’m sacrificing my life for that company” should be unacceptable to us.





