Conclusion：The Future of Fit

Talented people need organizations less than organizations need talented people.

— Dan Pink

WE CAN SEE IT CLEAR AS DAY . . .

Happy people of all cultures and walks of life joyously working every day. Their spirits are light and you can feel the contentment radiating off them. Their productivity is high and they deeply believe that what they’re doing every day is important and matters to someone, no matter what job or position they hold. Beyond fitting in at work, these people feel well suited both to their exact job, and to the organization that they have joined, at least for now. People’s lives are working. Men and women equally, across race and other identity aspects, feel energized and motivated to do a great job. While every day is not bliss, on the whole, over time, people are thriving in their places of work, and thus organizations are meeting their mission and profit goals, the global economy is succeeding, and families and communities are healthier.

Ahhhhhh.

Feels good, right?

Can we get there? What will it really take?

We believe that the first step is for people, employees at work, to take charge of their own love affair with their jobs. All social change movements start when a small group of people claim a point of view and actively work together to make change happen. Acknowledge the importance of work fit to you, your well-being, the well-being of your family, your community, your organization, and the world at large. Consider what it would mean to actively pursue great fit as a central component of your health.

Follow the tips in this book to find great work fit for yourself as soon as you can.

Know that great work fit is temporally fleeting, so don’t give up if you find yourself misfit over time. And if, after reading this book, you’re able to improve your work fit, or, even better, secure a job that you love (for now), we’ll know that the book will have been worth writing.

Our Dream

Our fundamental dream, however, goes way beyond each of you activating an individual change. In our image of the future of work fit, organizations actively design themselves to be great places for human beings to work, now and tomorrow. Leaders, from the CEO to the frontline managers, choose to pay attention to fit and create workplaces in which the people who work for them thrive. These leaders consider the six elements of work fit in how they configure their offices, in how they compensate people, in how they train and invest in people, in how they help people live full and healthy lives, in how they make work meaningful, in how they partner at work, and in how they can build a company culture where people grow.

Work fit becomes part of the conversation for organizations large and small, right up there with profit margin, shareholder equity, and waste metrics. Leaders look at their ability to be good for the people who work for them as a measure of their results, not as an afterthought once the numbers are in.

When this happens, the unimaginable takes place.

Each and every employee, whether frontline or executive, gets a little more connected, to themselves, to the work, and to each other. In that connective spirit they’re inspired to work hard, to bring their best effort forward, which cascades into a cycle of excellence. There is more joy, more love, more grace, and more cooperation than ever before. Customers feel the impact and want more.

People loving their jobs can and will change the world. We believe it. And we invite all leaders out there to act as if they believe it, too.

Let’s get on it.





