9 The Changing World of Work

There’s always a story. It’s all stories, really. The sun coming up every day is a story. Everything’s got a story in it. Change the story, change the world.

— Terry Pratchett

THE STORY OF WORK IN AMERICA today isn’t pretty. Workers are feeling overwhelmed, burned out, disengaged, anxious, and stressed out to the point of feeling ill. People are working more hours than ever, especially in competitive professions such as law and management, and many people report feeling pressure to work even more than the 47-hour-a-week average reported by Gallup (Saad 2014). Despite studies that show that our collective health, wellness, and performance are decreasing with long hours, people are working even harder and taking fewer vacations for fear that if they don’t appear “all in” they may lose their jobs. In their article on managing high-intensity workplaces, Erin Reid and Lakshmi Ramarajan (2016) said that “organizations pressure employees to become what sociologists have called ideal workers: people totally dedicated to their jobs and always on call. . . . In such places, any suggestion of meaningful outside interests and commitments can signal a lack of fitness for the job.”

Human beings at work are simply not thriving, and this affects the performance of the organizations in which they work and the communities in which they live. Despite technological and social gains worldwide, the people who do the daily work tasks to keep economies, industries, and governments contributing are less vibrant, happy, and fulfilled than ever before, and they’re therefore likely not doing their best work. The traditional “good jobs” supported by Roosevelt’s New Deal, which offered good benefits, permanent security, and potential for advancement, have evaporated under the weight of startups, mergers, and global connectivity.

Michael graduated from a good university a few years ago with a bachelor’s degree and a great GPA. After studying leadership, he decided to work for a few years before deciding if grad school was right for him. Six months as an office worker left him empty and demoralized because of the drudgery and sameness of the work. Next, he worked at a factory on a bread line, hoping that manual labor would provide some satisfaction. A tri-lingual speaker, Michael is passionate about climate change and corporate responsibility; he’s frustrated that he hasn’t been able to find a place to hang his hat, but he doesn’t want a corporate job with endless hours. He wonders, doesn’t anyone want a worker like him? Someone who wants to make a difference, can work hard, can write well, and is very good on a team? He’ll give his all to the right job if he can find one!

Joan, on the other hand, is in her early 50s and considering her next move. She studied accounting as an undergrad and has worked hard her whole career as a mid-level finance person. Her kids are almost grown, and she would love to find work that makes her heart sing a bit more. She’s had three bosses in three years and wonders if there’s a better role or company for someone like her. She worries that her computer skills are dated, but oh how she would love a change!

Joan and Michael, in two very different stages of life, seek jobs that will fulfill them and put bread on the table, but they’re struggling to find the right fit. They’re not alone: a study by The Energy Project found that 59 percent of workers are physically depleted, emotionally drained, mentally distracted, and lacking in meaning and purpose. In the same study, only 30 percent of employees say they have an opportunity to do what they enjoy most at work (Schwartz and Porath 2014b).

Key Factors to Deteriorating Happiness at Work

The world of work is in great flux. There are new productivity tools introduced every week that are supposed to help us get more work done, faster. We’re connected with employees and colleagues worldwide via a multitude of devices that are always on. These changes in the world of work have both positive and negative effects on people globally.



Figure 9-1. Listed above are the top trends affecting employer/employee fit today.

Let’s look at the top trends affecting employer-employee fit today:

New and Ambiguous Roles

New jobs appear every year that didn’t previously exist, with titles such as Social Media Coordinator, Director of First Impressions, Unschooling Counselor, and Growth Hacker, to name a few. In our technology-driven economy of service businesses, where information (data) rules, jobs are morphing in novel and unanticipated ways. Gone are the days when the selection of one career path in a known profession was a sure thing for life (doctor, lawyer, civil servant). And even in known professions, paths are changing quickly. For example, physicians may review MRIs from thousands of miles away without seeing the patients, or marketing managers may work only in the digital media realm. And this pace of change will increase over time – it’s estimated that 65 percent of the jobs that will be available when today’s kindergartners graduate college don’t even exist today (Rosen 2011).

Increase in the Desire for Meaning at Work

The days when a job was just to make money to provide for the family have passed; the purpose behind our drive to work has shifted. Increasingly, new workers (especially the Millennial generation) seek meaning when they look for a job. This means that despite the perks, promotions, pathways, or professions of a particular role, if employees can’t find a higher purpose in their work or company, they’ll feel disconnected, disenfranchised, and, ultimately, misfit (see Chapter 3, “Meaning Fit”). While it’s possible that this has always been so, it feels more acute today when long-term employer-employee relationships are not a given. In fact, most people can expect to have 11 to 13 jobs during their lifetime.

Flexibility as a Currency

Workers today aren’t satisfied with traditional nine-to-five work hours and much prefer to schedule their work around hobbies, caregiving, and lifestyle choices. This alters the traditional construct of an “office” where people sit in cubicles or meeting rooms and crank out documents and information. People want portability and flexibility regarding the way they work.

Information Overload

Today, availability of data isn’t an issue: we’re swimming in information every minute of the day, accessible by various devices and from locations as wide-ranging as a boat in the Arctic to our neighborhood Starbucks. Access to information isn’t an issue, it’s knowing what information to pay attention to, and whether that information is relevant to our decision-making process.

Distributed Companies and Teams

Digital connection anywhere, anytime, means that people and work are no longer organized in traditional settings. People work across platforms, time zones, languages, and cultures more than ever before, putting increased demand on communication, clarity, and team cohesion. This trend puts pressure on employees at all levels to build social capital with people in all directions to get things done. It’s not only feasible but likely that you have a boss or teammates you’ve never met in person. This changes how we relate to one another, how we partner, and how we learn.

Speed

Things happen faster than ever in the world of work, resulting in increasing pressure for workers to assimilate huge volumes of data and make decisions fast for fear of falling behind or missing an opportunity. The internalized pressure to do more in less time leads to the iconic heads down, shoulders hunched, running-in-place image of U.S. workers – all action, very little reflection.

Cloud Workers (Outsourcing)

An increasing number of workers are freelancers today, and companies frequently reduce costs by outsourcing work to part-time or occasional workers to avoid overhead (Nunberg 2016). This combination provides flexibility for workers but fails to deliver stability and predictability, which impacts their ability to keep ahead of living expenses, plan for major life events, and take advantage of company benefits. This trend has negative implications for the social contract between employer and employee regarding long-term security, and this affects families, communities, and individuals.

Sustainability Imperative

Business growth for growth’s sake is being replaced by many organizations with purposeful profitability – responsible growth done in ways that minimize impact on the environment, people, and communities – where greed has given way to values, profit with impact, and business as a force for good. The rise of social entrepreneurship means that more and more companies form daily that not only make money but also make a difference. The new business status of benefit corporations and B Corps (see bcorporation.net) – embraced by strong consumer brands such as Patagonia, Dansko, and Method – are evidence of consumers’ interest in products that, at a minimum, do no harm. This has implications for employees, particularly given their increasing desire to find meaning and purpose at work.

Diversity

Numerous factors impact the extent to which organizations seek more diverse pools of workers. The case has been made that having people with diverse experience, views, and contributions makes companies better (as long as they can navigate conflict). Beyond quotas and government regulations regarding equal employment opportunity, organizations increasingly seek workers who represent their client population. And rather than focus on people who are alike, employers are seeking those with diverse experiences and perspectives to elevate their creativity and innovation. There are still challenges with recruitment and retention of minorities, but the tide has turned when it comes to an interest in and commitment to diversity.

Overwhelmed Workers

The volume and speed of changes in global markets have created an overwhelmed workforce. Because of this feeling of being overloaded, inundated, and overstretched, there’s been a tremendous increase in the popularity of yoga, meditation, and mindfulness. Brigid Schulte (2014) writes in her book, Overwhelm: How to Work, Love, and Play When No One Has the Time, about the costs of our work-hard culture as well as ideas for how we can reclaim our lives together. With productivity decreasing with excessive work, we should all be incented to reduce or eliminate our feelings of being overwhelmed.

Generational Turnover

The long-anticipated brain drain of baby boomers entering retirement has hit at last. With an estimated 53.5 million Millennials in the workforce in America in 2015, the transfer of power and influence is well underway, and because of generational differences we’ll undoubtedly continue to change how we work. Millennial workers are motivated by different priorities and are, by their very nature, changing how work unfolds. Interestingly, a 2015 Gallup survey showed that Millennials are the least-engaged generation at work – only 28.9 percent say they are actively engaged (Adkins 2015).

ASK YOURSELF . . .

• How have I been impacted by any of these workforce trends?

• Are there other trends that are impacting my work situation?



Impact on Our Fit

So what do these trends mean in terms of your ability to find the right work fit?

What We Look For In A Job Has Shifted

Let go of outdated notions of what to look for in a job. Gone are the days when incremental salary increases, a desk with a view, a particular title, and prestige were essential elements of work. In the new world of work, what matters to us is dramatically different, and we have more leverage than ever before with employers to get exactly what we want. Smart companies know that it benefits them to find workers who are a good fit, so knowing what matters to you significantly increases the likelihood of finding a great fit.

The Six Elements of Work Fit, Reprioritized

The six elements of work fit that we’ve identified are likely very similar to those that mattered to employees in the past, but the importance of each element has shifted, especially since the global recession of 2007–2009. Meaning and lifestyle fit, for example, have become more important as employees let go of traditional notions of the American Dream, such as financial gain, and focus instead on their well-being.

Culture fit has become increasingly vital to a workforce that values transparency, which is much more available in the digital age of social media; employee empowerment initiatives and studies have shown that the ability to feel like you’re a part of the company greatly increase motivation and morale.

Job fit has shifted since many entry-level jobs require advanced education, and people are specializing with more training and experience. And, finally, relationship fit shows up in the work-fit equation because people increasingly work as part of multiple teams, requiring unprecedented partnership and collaboration.

The Process is Highly Personal and Subjective

The proliferation of “Great Places to Work” rankings in magazines reflects the degree to which employers care about their company being perceived as a favorable workplace. And to a degree, these ratings and company descriptions are useful to job seekers, helping them to find companies whose employees rated certain attributes highly. On the whole, though, our research confirms that just because a company is on the list doesn’t mean that they’re the right fit for you. In fact, because of their time sensitivity and focus on morale and motivation, these ratings function best as promotional tools for an organization rather than as a provider of any guidance for you in determining potential work fit. Time after time, we’ve interviewed employees who worked in top “Great Places to Work” who left because the work fit was poor for them.

Learning Matters

In the face of today’s dynamic workplace, the opportunity to learn and develop in a role, at any level, is extremely important. Our interest in growing, in contributing, and in learning more (about the work, ourselves, the organization, the market, being a team player, and leading) is a critical aspect of finding an ideal work fit. Because we’ll hold many jobs over our lifetimes, one of our essential human needs – to get better by learning and growing – can and should be met by our work.

Society Needs Organizations, So Fit Matters

Despite the growth in the number of freelancers, there are still vastly more people employed full- or part-time by organizations. Our social structure depends on organizations large and small for some of the things that make civilization as we know it work: a tax basis that supports social services, retirement possibilities, insurance cost reduction, and the synergistic lift that organizations can achieve through cost sharing, innovation, creativity, and impact. Accordingly, if organizations continue to be the primary employers, work fit becomes essential to the organizations themselves as well as to the individuals who work in them.

It’s Up to You

Companies are focused more than ever before on solving the puzzles of attracting and retaining the talent they need for their businesses to thrive, but ultimately the responsibility for finding a great work fit is on your shoulders. Knowing yourself, and being able to assess an organization for fit before you join it, are critical skills as you hunt for the right place to hang your hat. We expect that organizations will strive to get better at being people-centered to ensure fit and reduce their costs, but you, the individual job seeker wanting a great work fit, must take the reins and be responsible for finding the best workplace for you.





