8 Financial Fit

Some people are so poor; all they have is money.

— Patrick Meagher

WHILE YOUR PAY is one of the most visible and seemingly concrete components of your work, the role of financial fit is more complex and requires deep reflection on both your current and future needs. Your financial compensation not only involves your base pay, raises, bonuses, and commissions but also additional currencies such as vacation time, healthcare benefits, and opportunities to save for retirement. Your needs are multi-faceted – some are practical, such as understanding the cash flow required to take care of financial obligations, and some are more closely tied to identity and emotional desires. Financial fit is great when all of those needs and realities match your employer’s compensation currencies. Like the other work-fit elements, financial fit isn’t static, and it must be considered in the context of those other elements and your stage in life.

While compensation frequently plays a large role in whether you decide to take a particular job, it has a relatively small role in ongoing work fit. In our research, compensation was actually ranked lower than job content, relationships, and culture as a reason why people see their work as a great fit. We hear repeatedly from people who say that they love their job so much they would take less pay if necessary, as well as from people who find that high compensation can’t make up for lack of fit in other areas. A study by Glassdoor found that an employee’s compensation and benefits rating had the second smallest effect on overall satisfaction (Nuñez 2015). The only thing less important to employees was their company’s business outlook rating. In research by Deloitte, 95 percent of job candidates said that culture is more important than compensation (Bersin 2015).

Nancy had this to say about the role of financial fit compared to other elements: “I had a really good position with solid compensation and stability, yet I wasn’t allowed to develop professionally in ways that fit my strengths, so I quit that job for a part-time position. It was the best decision ever! Great people to work with and an amazing training opportunity for me – at this point in life those things matter more to me than the extra income.”

Of course, this doesn’t mean that you should work for free or simply follow your bliss and hope that you’ll have enough money to make ends meet. It’s unwise and naïve to assume that money doesn’t matter. There are many hard-working people who struggle mightily to ensure that they’re able to pay their bills and provide for their families. Insuring that your basic needs are covered is critical and foundational to thriving in any capacity. Not being able to meet your financial obligations is an obvious sign of misfit, but once basic needs for food, shelter, transportation, and clothing for you and your family are met, the psychological benefits of money tend to diminish.

In a widely cited paper, Daniel Kahneman and Angus Deaton (2010) reported that in the United States emotional well-being levels increase with salary levels up to a salary of $75,000 – but that they plateau above that. While the actual dollar level may vary depending upon where you live and work – $75,000 buys a lot less in San Francisco than in Kansas City – the point is an important one. Once your basic needs are met, more compensation by itself will typically not result in a better work fit or increase your sense of thriving.

Felt Fair Pay

What does matter to financial fit is a sense of fairness. Given the amount of time and energy you devote to work, you want to ensure that you’re valued in an appropriate way. This is called felt fair pay. Receiving less than you need or deserve can lead to dissatisfaction that can impact commitment and, in some cases, confidence. So, while great financial fit won’t guarantee success or happiness, poor financial fit is likely to cause harm and stress. As one survey respondent noted, feeling unfairly compensated led to “anger and bitterness.” Another respondent called it “stressful and frustrating” to be undervalued financially.

Pay equity has become a hot topic for organizations and individuals. Unlike the past, where social taboo made it difficult to compare your pay with that of other people, today there’s a general move toward greater transparency, with multiple resources available to find standard pay rates. Many women and minorities still face tremendous pay gap issues. Controlling for factors such as career level, education, skills, job responsibilities, and more, researchers at PayScale (2015) have found that women earn between 3 percent and 5 percent less than men for equivalent work. For some industries, such as finance and tech, the gap is much higher. And we’ve encountered numerous clients – male and female – who have found that after years with the same company they were being paid less than newer hires.

An important way to ensure that your pay is fair is to be proactive in knowing what your skills are worth. Grounding yourself in the facts can be especially critical if, like some men and many women, you’re not comfortable or experienced in negotiating for more pay. Salary.com found that 84 percent of employers expect prospective employees to negotiate salary during the interview stage (Gouveia 2013). Yet only 30 percent of women negotiate, while 46 percent of men do (Babcock and Laschever 2007).

You can use websites such as payscale.com or glassdoor.com to compare your salary to those in similar jobs, factoring in location, experience, education, and other attributes. Once you gain this knowledge, you’ll be better equipped to negotiate with your current employer or decide to move to a job that provides a better financial match.

ASK YOURSELF . . .

• How am I being compensated relative to averages for my profession, location, education, and level of experience?



Knowing Your Cash Flow Needs

Understanding what you need for great financial fit requires a realistic assessment of your expenses. It’s important to consider all annual, quarterly, and monthly expenses. This includes your rent or mortgage, car payments, car insurance, credit cards with outstanding balances, gym memberships, entertainment, hobbies, family obligations, and grocery bills. If you don’t know that number, get out a piece of paper and figure it out. Once you know your total annual expenses, calculate what that is monthly. To understand your financial options, it’s critical to have a good grasp of your obligations and spending patterns.

Rich was unhappy in his job as a software engineer, and he decided to accept a position to do web development for a nonprofit where he had been serving as a volunteer. The change meant a significant decrease in salary and therefore a big decrease in spending. “I’ve had to make sacrifices, but it’s worth it. Now I help people, I’m valued, I feel tremendous trust from my boss and coworkers.”

Like Rich, you may want to take a job that pays less but provides great fit in other areas. To do that you have to figure out how to spend less each month. You may also have to save money and reduce your debt prior to making the job switch.

While there will be a minimum threshold you require for monthly pay, the way you prefer your compensation to be structured can vary tremendously based on factors such as family situation, stage of life, and personality. Your need for a pay structure that’s fixed vs. variable, or short-term vs. long-term, can be a critical part of establishing great financial fit.

For example, an individual with fewer outside financial commitments, perhaps someone who’s single with no children or someone who has a partner with a steady, dependable income, may be quite comfortable with pay that’s highly variable. Variable pay can be great but risky. A real estate agent or a salesperson who’s heavily commissioned may make a large income one year and significantly less the following year. This can still be a good fit if your fixed financial obligations are low or if you have other sources to turn to in lean times.

Similarly, some financial compensation packages are focused on short-term value (base pay and bonus) while others are structured around long-term incentives (equity, retirement savings plans). As with variable pay, the more certainty you need to meet daily financial obligations, the more you may trade off potential long-term gains. This willingness to prioritize short-term pay over future potential will vary based on your current financial situation, your projected needs for the future, and how close that future is. For example, someone with little savings who has children nearing college age may be less likely to bet on less salary and the potential for long-term gain than someone in their early twenties.

Don’t forget, your pay package is only part of the equation. Your total compensation may include benefits such as health insurance, dental/vision benefits, vacation time, personal days, disability insurance, and perks such as free food and gym facilities. Even factors such as job title or access to training programs can provide great value over time. Smart organizations are increasingly designing their compensation programs in the context of a total rewards strategy that takes into account pay, benefits, and non-monetary rewards such as career paths and work-life balance. Each of these has different value to different individuals. Know what’s most important to you.

Jamie worked in patient collections at a large community hospital. A single mother, she had average health insurance and didn’t think much about coverage at first. Over the years, however, as first one and then both of her sons developed health concerns requiring frequent medical treatment and intervention, health insurance became key to how she felt about her financial fit. She had taken a new job with a higher salary, but left it after a few months to join her previous employer, who offered full medical coverage for all employees, including their dependents. As the medical bills mounted, having comprehensive coverage was far more important to Jamie than a higher salary.

The Psychology of Pay

Beyond meeting functional needs, financial fit may also be tied to your psychological needs. This is different from the tangible compensation we just discussed and is closely tied to identity, and it can have a major impact on your sense of being fairly valued. People differ in their view of money and the role it plays in their identity.

For some individuals, money represents an important symbol of power and achievement. Dan lived in Silicon Valley and had seen many of his peers make money on stock options when their companies went public. He felt left behind as they moved to nicer neighborhoods and bought expensive cars. So he left a secure job for a role in a smaller company that was primed to go public, in hopes that he too would be able to hit the jackpot. It was worth the risk for Dan.

For others, money represents a means to future security. Lori stayed in a job she grew to dislike because staying longer meant hitting certain retirement savings milestones – more savings meant more freedom for her and her husband once they stopped working.

Money from work may be a way to support other passions. Nick valued the flexibility of contract work because he could choose to work more or fewer hours based on his financial needs of the moment. His preferred lifestyle was to work a contract for six months and then travel for six months.

You need to understand what financial compensation really means to you. The pursuit of power, recognition, status, security, family support, flexibility – these are all legitimate financial motivations. The role that money plays in motivating you will shape what you look for in an organization and its compensation package, and it will certainly shape how you balance financial fit with the other elements of work fit.

ASK YOURSELF . . .

• Do I know what I need to earn in order to meet my financial obligations?

• What is my preferred mix of fixed vs. variable compensation? Short-term vs. long-term?

• What benefits are most important to me?

• Are there other psychological needs my compensation should address?



Assess Your Financial Fit

You deserve to be paid fairly based on your experience and on what’s typical for the position. You need to be compensated in a way that enables you to meet your obligations and fulfills larger psychological needs. Checklist 8-1 can help you understand just how well your current situation meets your needs.



Checklist 8-1. Check all of the statements above that apply to you. Use the checklist as a reference as you progress in finding financial fit. You’ll return to your answers in a final assessment of your work fit in Chapter 13.

If you’ve identified areas of misfit, Chapter 15, “Flexing to Fit Where You Are,” will provide tips to help you negotiate a better financial situation with your current employer, while Chapter 17, “Evaluating New Opportunities,” will help ensure that any new opportunities are a better match. It’s important to remember that financial fit interacts with the other elements of work fit in significant ways. Perhaps just as important as your total compensation are intangible benefits such as the opportunity to develop new skills, access to talented mentors, the chance to relocate to a desirable area, a culture that feels like home, or adding a prestigious company to your resume. Great fit in areas such as job content or lifestyle may increase your comfort with less compensation. On the other hand, you may want higher pay to make up for less-desirable attributes of the job. In Chapter 13, “Calculating the Elements and Weighing Trade-Offs,” we’ll show you how to consider financial fit together with the other elements of work fit so that they all add up to you loving your work.





