7 Lifestyle Fit

Don’t get so busy making a career that you forget to make a life.

— Dolly Parton

HOW MANY HATS DO YOU WEAR? Employee, parent, athlete, boss, artist, coach, caregiver, spouse, friend? We’re wired with a spectrum of needs and desires that aren’t met through just one role. We crave the acknowledgment and extrinsic rewards that come with a fulfilling job, while also desiring the companionship of family and close personal friends, or the deep sense of purpose that may be found in community service, travel, or a favorite hobby. As a result, we find ourselves constantly juggling. Every day we make hundreds of decisions about how to spend our time and energy. We navigate competing demands, expectations, and desires as we try to fulfill our many responsibilities without depriving ourselves and disappointing others. Lifestyle fit is about making this balancing act more manageable.

Great lifestyle fit happens when our priorities and responsibilities at home and in our community are in sync and supported by our job requirements and our employer’s culture and policies. Our research and experience suggest that most of us struggle at some point with lifestyle fit and that, more than with any other element, lifestyle misfit can cause significant relationship, mental, and physical health strains. When meeting demands in one role makes it difficult to meet demands in others, you suffer. When these conflicting demands compete unsuccessfully for your finite time and emotional energy, your work and other relationships and responsibilities suffer as well.

ASK YOURSELF . . .

• What are some of the roles I currently play (parent, employee, boss, volunteer)?

• If you had to rank the roles in order of importance, what would that look like? Why?

• Do responsibilities in one role make it difficult to meet responsibilities in other roles?



If you feel a strain between your commitments at home and at work, you’re not alone. In a study conducted by Barry Posner (2010), 50 percent of managers agreed with the statement “anxiety about my job frequently spills over into my home and personal life.” In a 2010 study by researchers Danielle Talbot and Jon Billsberry (2010), 68 percent of the participants mentioned their families, other social networks and connections, or obligations they have in their communities as affecting their fit at work. Changing societal norms, such as the influx of women into the workforce, the increased prevalence of dual-earner couples, movement away from traditional gender-based roles, and technology that blurs the line between work and personal time, all contribute to the challenge. When you add factors such as the tremendous growth in the number of single parents and in employees taking care of aging relatives, lifestyle challenges affect all of us.

While the stress of competing obligations is increasing, our willingness to make extreme sacrifices for work is decreasing. As one respondent said, “In my best job ever, I had a lot of flexibility and had more work-life balance. I didn’t have to take a hit at home.” As companies realize this, norms, expectations, and practices are changing at work. For example, a drywall products manufacturing company implemented four-day workweeks for all employees during the recession and found that employees loved the schedule and wanted to keep it year-round.

Posner (2012) found that only 38 percent of managers in 2009 answered yes to the question, “Would you give up attending an important function at home if it conflicted with an important job-related function?” This represented a significant decrease from 1981, when the number was 60 percent. When asked, in 2009, “To further your career would you move your family to a new location for a higher paying and/or more responsible job?” 48 percent responded yes or probably and 36 percent said no or probably not. In 1981, 57 percent said yes or probably and only 25 percent said no or probably not. As we discussed in Chapter 9, the world of work is rapidly changing. Most people are no longer willing to blindly put work ahead of everything else in their lives. If you’re struggling with lifestyle fit, you can take heart that companies are waking up to this new reality and more options are emerging. Achieving the right lifestyle balance is difficult but possible if you honestly consider your needs and the trade-offs you’re willing to make.

Just How Important Is Work, Anyway?

Achieving great lifestyle fit begins with honestly assessing the various roles you play and the importance of work, at this particular moment, in your overall life and identity. In our experience, some people view work as necessary and even desirable, but of secondary importance to their other responsibilities. For these individuals, work isn’t an end in itself but a means to acquire resources to enjoy other parts of their lives. This has led many workers, since the recession, to become contractors in their specialty fields, doing piecework through networked communities for a host of clients. The upsurge in on-demand workers in recent years, also called “gig economy workers,” isn’t showing any evidence of slowing down. Intuit estimates that, by 2020, the number of employees working this way will double (Sharpe 2016). The flexibility of on-demand jobs works well for many employees today from a lifestyle perspective, even though there are often elements lacking (such as predictable income, healthcare insurance, workers’ compensation, etc.). There are many benefits to on-demand work, either for people seeking permanent flexibility and autonomy or as a stopgap for those in transition.

At the other end of the spectrum are individuals who get most of their identity needs met through job accomplishments and who see work as their first priority. Researcher Amy Wrzesniewski and colleagues (1997) categorize people into three groups: people who have jobs and are only interested in the material benefits from work; people with careers who have a deeper personal investment in their work and mark achievements not only through monetary gains but also through advancements within the occupational structure; and people for whom work is a calling, inseparable from the rest of their lives. None of these groups is better than the others. We may shift our perspective at various stages in our life; what’s necessary for assessing your lifestyle fit is figuring out where you are today on the lifestyle fit spectrum shown in Figure 7-1.



Figure 7-1. To assess your lifestyle fit you need to first figure out where you are today on the lifestyle fit spectrum.

We’ve seen individuals in what look like dream jobs struggle because they really wanted to spend much less time at work and much more time at home with their children or in pursuit of an outside vocation. And we’ve seen others in fantastic part-time, flexible situations grow frustrated because they really wanted the thrill and recognition that comes from being in a fast-paced, highly demanding job, or they longed for income predictability. Circumstances may intervene, causing you to put more or less focus on your work role than you want, but you may be able to improve your situation if you know what a great lifestyle fit would be for you.

ASK YOURSELF . . .

• How important is paid work relative to my other roles?

• Where do I get the greatest sense of accomplishment?

• Which roles give me the greatest sense of joy?

• What would be an optimal balance of my time and energy?



Your answers matter because they contain clues about the trade-offs you’re willing to make and the areas you want to prioritize. A young father who wants to be actively involved with coaching his children’s teams may choose a job that pays less but offers maximum flexibility. An aspiring CEO fresh out of business school may be thrilled with a consulting job that requires long hours and tremendous travel but also offers exposure to senior executives at multiple companies. Depending on your answers, you may find certain occupations or certain companies to be a better lifestyle fit.

Consider the case of Amazon. After a New York Times article detailed the allegedly family-unfriendly work conditions at Amazon, numerous employees came forward to say that they liked working in a company where the reward for hard work is even harder work (Kantor and Streitfeld 2015). They found the all-in experience of working with highly talented colleagues on challenging problems to be extremely rewarding. Other (mostly former) employees found the grueling hours, harsh judgment, and environment of “purposeful Darwinism” to be far more bruising than they could accept. This was especially true among some parents who said they left or were considering quitting because of pressure from bosses or peers to spend less time with their families.

Your needs and desires are unique. The right lifestyle fit for your colleague in the cubicle next door isn’t necessarily the right fit for you. An employee working for Apple said it this way, “Everybody thinks this is my dream job, but I’m actively looking. Apple is a great company, but for me right now, the trade-offs are too great for my lifestyle.”

Your lifestyle fit needs are dynamic – the importance of work relative to your other responsibilities will likely vary at different stages of your life. Your willingness to make significant lifestyle sacrifices may be different when you’re just out of school and establishing a professional reputation (what we call Early Real Life) than when you’re in your fifties and dealing with an aging parent (Maturing). We’ve heard many stories of individuals who felt that they had a great lifestyle fit at one point in their career and then struggled as their circumstances changed. We’ll go into more detail about stages of life in Chapter 12, “Knowing Yourself and What You Need.”

One of the most significant lifestyle changes comes with parenthood. Work conflicts tend to increase with the presence of children and can vary with their ages or individual needs. Greater family demands – more children or adult dependents at home – frequently create a need for more flexible or less-demanding work conditions. Job requirements you once embraced, such as weekend hours or extensive travel, can suddenly create significant stress.

In some cases, these demands might lead you to change your occupation to one with different requirements and greater flexibility. Leslie moved from high-profile, high-demand marketing jobs at Pepsi and Twentieth Century Fox to significantly greater flexibility as a university administrator. “My career move to higher education enabled me to enjoy a lot more control over my time. If I needed to take my son to the doctor, or if I wanted to attend a school function, it was easy to set aside my work and do it later at home.”

In other cases, a lifestyle change might lead you to request a new role with your current employer. When her son was born, Cammie was heading up national sales for a major grocery manufacturer. Her customers and her team members were spread across the United States in eight different cities. “In sales, nothing replaces face-to-face interactions. Whenever I was in my home office in Dallas I felt like I was letting down my team and my customers. I felt a major conflict between what I knew I needed to do to be a good sales leader and my new role at home. I asked to move to a job that required much less travel. Because I had been a good performer with the company for many years, they were willing to make that accommodation.”

While becoming a parent is a common reason for a change in lifestyle fit, it’s certainly not the only trigger. John was a mid-distance runner in college who embarked on a career in high tech after graduation. He kept running for fun, and discovered, in his late 30s, a penchant for running ultra-marathons, sometimes over 100 miles. His job at the time was a nine-to-five office job, but he felt that to compete at the level he wanted to it would work best for him if he could flex his hours, allowing him to get long, multi-hour training runs in early in the day. Despite some trepidation, John approached his boss, and after some negotiation they agreed that he could try a flextime schedule that allowed him to come in at mid-day three days a week, working into the evening. His ability to pursue his passion elated him, and his running improved with a consistent, productive training schedule. At work he managed to schedule meetings with others during their overlapping hours. And his productivity increased because there was less distraction at the office in the late evenings. His employer was pleased with the result, as was John.

ASK YOURSELF . . .

• Has my lifestyle situation changed recently?

• If so, has this changed what I need from my job and my employer?



When considering the needs that arise from your roles, it’s also critical to assess your level of outside support. The availability of family resources – parents who live close by or a spouse who isn’t employed or works from home or part-time – can make a difference in the level of flexibility you require or the work conditions, such as travel, that you can successfully assume. Economic resources to purchase reliable and flexible child or elder care are another factor.

A growing lifestyle fit factor for many individuals is the amount of time it takes to commute to the job. When you’re juggling multiple roles and every hour counts, time in traffic can cause stress and anxiety. One study conducted by Canada’s University of Waterloo concluded that people with the longest commutes have the lowest overall satisfaction with life (Hilbrecht, Smale, and Mock 2014). The authors report that commute lengths are linked to a sense of time pressure. People who spend the most time on the road experience higher levels of stress because they constantly feel hurried. Many of them spend much of their time on the road worrying about all the activities they’re missing. If you’re seeking to prioritize outside-of-work responsibilities, your commute time may be a critical factor in lifestyle fit.

Work-Home Boundary Preferences

Another important component of lifestyle fit is the boundary between your personal life and work. Boundaries between work and home are blurring as portable digital technology makes it increasingly possible to work anywhere, anytime. Individuals differ in how they like to manage their time to meet work and outside responsibilities. Some people prefer to separate or segment roles so that boundary crossings are minimized. For example, these people might keep separate email accounts for work and family and try to conduct work at the workplace and take care of family matters only during breaks and non-work time. We’ve even noticed more of these “segmenters” carrying two phones – one for work and one for personal use.

Flexible schedules work well for these individuals because they enable greater distinction between time at work and time in other roles. Other individuals prefer integrating work and family roles all day long. This might entail constantly trading text messages with children from the office, or monitoring emails at home and on vacation, rather than returning to work to find hundreds of messages in their inbox.

Different jobs, cultures, and bosses have different norms around boundaries. Consider what works best for you and make those needs clear with your manager and work colleagues.

ASK YOURSELF . . .

• How much flexibility at work do I need to take care of outside responsibilities?

• What support can I count on?

• How much time does my commute take away from other, more-productive activities?

• How comfortable am I blurring the boundaries between work and home?



A Word on Gender Differences

While both men and women struggle with work-life conflicts, the challenges can feel different. Societal norms have given men and women different perceptions of their work and family roles. It’s not unusual for men to feel that family interferes with work but not feel that work interferes with family. Working moms, on the other hand, often perceive that, not only does the work schedule interfere with their family time, but also that household responsibilities take away from the resources and energy they have to give at work. This isn’t surprising, given that women still perform up to 19 more hours a week doing household tasks and devote on average 7 more hours a week to family then men do. Perhaps because of these pressures, 50 percent of women with children say that their ideal situation is to work part-time, compared to only 15 percent of men (Parker and Wang 2013b).

In addition, having a flexible work schedule is much more important to working mothers than it is to working fathers. Fully 70 percent of working moms with children under 18 say that having a flexible schedule is extremely important to them, while only about 48 percent of working fathers place the same level of importance on this.

Great lifestyle fit, however, isn’t just a need for women. Research suggests that men are facing more emotional conflict than ever as they seek to spend more time on activities outside of work. The National Study of the Changing Workforce – a 30-year-long study from the Families and Work Institute – found that 60 percent of fathers reported experiencing work-family conflict in 2008, an increase from 35 percent of fathers in 1977 (Galinsky, Aumann, and Bond 2009). As Gary Barker says in the 2016 State of America’s Fathers report, “Never before has the gap been so large between what parents of all genders want in terms of parental leave and support for their caregiving roles, and what our state and federal governments, workplaces, and social norms permit” (Heilman et al. 2016). And Erin Rehel and Emily Baxter (2015) add, “This rise in work-family conflict reported by men has grown alongside a new fathering ideal where being a good father means more than what some have termed ‘earning as caring.’”

Attitudes are changing dramatically as Millennials become a more dominant force in the workplace. The Pew Research Center found that Millennial fathers were more in favor of paid paternity leave than Generation Xer or Baby Boomer fathers: 93 percent of Millennials said it was somewhat, very, or extremely important, compared to 88 percent of Gen Xers and 77 percent of Baby Boomers (Parker and Wang, 2013a).

ASK YOURSELF . . .

• Do I face unique challenges based on my gender, race, or any other difference?

• How could my work change in a way that would be more supportive of my needs?



Assess Your Lifestyle Fit

Now that you’ve reflected on your current lifestyle fit requirements, you can more clearly assess whether your current job and organization are providing the support that you need. Checklist 7-1 is a good place to start.

If the checklist highlights that lifestyle fit is an issue for you, don’t lose heart! More organizations are recognizing that employees need to contribute at work and also fulfill outside responsibilities, and they’re increasingly implementing practices that allow employees to satisfy those needs.

Some level of tension between your many life roles is to be expected. Every day is filled with trade-offs and decisions. But success in one role shouldn’t mean undue sacrifices in other responsibilities that are important to you and bring you joy. With honest reflection on your needs, and proper due diligence in assessing the organization’s policies and norms, you can find great lifestyle fit. And when you find it, the good feelings you have about one role are likely to boost your confidence and self-esteem in others.

In Chapter 15, “Flexing to Fit Where You Are,” we’ll provide you tips on how to negotiate a better lifestyle fit with your current employer. If that’s not possible, in Chapter 17, “Evaluating New Opportunities,” we’ll provide you ways to assess your lifestyle fit in a new opportunity.



Checklist 7-1. Check all of the statements above that apply to you. Use the checklist as a reference as you progress in finding lifestyle fit. You’ll return to your answers in a final assessment of your work fit in Chapter 13.





