11 How Fit Impacts Organizations

Engaging the hearts, minds, and hands of talent is the most sustainable source of competitive advantage.

— Greg Harris, Quantum Workplace

ORGANIZATIONS ARE WAKING UP to the recognition that work fit matters. They may use different words to describe it (employee engagement, employee satisfaction, culture, climate, or organizational health), but there’s clearly a growing understanding that the better employees’ needs are met at work, the healthier, happier, more engaged, productive, and loyal they are to their organization. People who enjoy their jobs are more likely to feel inspired by the goals and values of their company, exert effort, and stay employed with the organization. The business case is irrefutable – take care of employees and they’ll take care of business.

The days when employees expected nothing more than a paycheck are gone. Led by Millennials, employees are increasingly seeking meaning as much as financial incentives from their employers and are unabashedly and rapidly changing jobs when their needs aren’t met. As Barry Schwartz (2015), author of Why We Work, says, “We want work that is challenging and engaging, that enables us to exercise some discretion and control over what we do, and that provides us opportunities to learn and grow. We want to work with colleagues we like and respect and with supervisors who like and respect us. Most of all, we want work that is meaningful – that makes a difference to other people and thus ennobles us in at least some small way.”

CEOs are responding to the trends and to the growing body of research in unprecedented ways. Mark Bertolini of Aetna raised wages, improved health benefits, and introduced yoga and mindfulness training. Netflix announced unlimited paternity leave. Google is legendary for its onsite amenities, which include a community garden, sleep pods, and cafeterias that serve free lunch and dinner. Leaders are paying attention to growing their capacity for fluently handling “the soft stuff” – motivating, inspiring, and connecting with the people who work for them.

Lara Harding, People Programs Manager at Google, said, “At Google, we know that health, family, and well-being are an important aspect of Googlers’ lives. We have also noticed that employees who are happy . . . demonstrate increased motivation. . . . [We] . . . work to ensure that Google is . . . an emotionally healthy place to work” (Gourlay, 2009).

Franchise company Great Harvest Bread employee Bonnie Harry says, “Giving your employees space to learn and support to grow creates a symbiotic relationship. They gain valuable life and work skills and you gain not only good employees but also the satisfaction of mentoring and helping them. And if they move to another career, you’ve both benefited from the experience of working together.”

In addition to gaining loyalty through perks such as updated offices, free food, fitness centers, and classes, smart companies are focusing on benefits to provide employees with more flexibility as well as looking for ways to get them involved in company decisions. Outdoor products retailer REI uses social media to get employees at all levels talking to each other via campfire circles about the things they care about (Kowalsky 2012). And small tech company TechSoft 3D involves employees in all locations in annual discussions on values and strategy to increase buy-in on where the company is heading.

Companies of all sizes are beginning to recognize that fit matters. Small companies reap the benefits of positive employee work fit even more directly than large companies since each person has a greater influence on morale and results. Employees at small and midsize firms often find opportunities to take on more responsibilities, earn greater recognition for successes, gain ample exposure to new practice areas, and have a more direct impact on a company’s bottom line.

Employees want to be in an environment where their values and beliefs are aligned with the organization and where they feel supported to do their best work. In research among employees who were considering a job change or who had recently switched employers, the top reason for a change was that the employees desired an opportunity to do what they do best (Mann and McCarville 2015). They want to fully contribute their talent and experience. Employees desire fit.

So Just What Does Fit Mean to Organizations?

As we said in the first chapter, work fit isn’t about looking alike or being part of the same social group, class, race, or gender. It’s about employees having a common set of values, desires, and expectations with their organizations that allows them to do their best.

One commonly measured output of fit is employee engagement, typically defined as the emotional commitment an employee has to the organization and its goals. Emotional commitment means that engaged employees care about their work and their company. They don’t work just for a paycheck, or just for the next promotion, but on behalf of the organization’s goals. We believe that when fit is right the connection can go even beyond engagement to inspiration. Eric Garton (2015) at Bain & Company researched the difference between satisfaction, engagement, and inspiration. He found that if satisfied employees are productive at an index level of 100, then engaged employees produce at 144, nearly half again as much. But then comes the real kicker: inspired employees score 225 on this scale. From a purely quantitative perspective, in other words, it would take two and a quarter satisfied employees to generate the same output as one inspired employee.

As one pundit put it, employees react differently when they encounter a wall. Satisfied employees hold a meeting to discuss what to do about walls. Engaged employees begin looking around for ladders to scale the wall. Inspired employees break right through it. Inspiration happens when fit is right.

One of the first researchers to study organization-people fit was Jennifer Chatman (1991), a professor at Northwestern University. She conducted research over a two-and-a-half-year period in partnership with eight of the largest U.S. public accounting firms. She surveyed junior audit staff during their initial orientation, asking them to sort through value statements (about quality, respect for individuals, flexibility, risk taking, etc.) and rank how consistent each statement was with their own beliefs. After 12 months she had the junior auditors rate their satisfaction and intent to leave. She saw a high correlation between fit at entry and satisfaction, as well as a negative correlation between fit and intent to leave. In other words, when fit is good, employees are likely to contribute their best work, and companies obviously benefit from this.

Brian Chesky, CEO at AirBnB, understands this. Most companies create their core values after they’ve hired a few dozen people; Airbnb created theirs before they hired anyone. Before hiring his first employee, Chesky ran through hundreds of applicants and interviewed dozens of people. It took him six months to find the person who was the right fit. Chesky says that he viewed bringing in this first employee as analogous to bringing the right DNA into the company. He didn’t view the process as merely bringing in a person to build a few features, he viewed it as a long-term investment in establishing the culture of the company. He wanted a diversity of backgrounds and experience, but he didn’t want diversity of values. As Brian says, “There’s no such thing as a good or bad culture; it’s either a strong or weak culture. And a good culture for somebody else may not be a good culture for you” (Bulygo 2015).

Innovative companies strive to hire for fit but understand that they can’t always get it right. Zappos believes so strongly in the concept of fit that the company offers exit payments to new employees who come to understand the organization and then decide that they’re not a good fit. Zappos recognizes the tremendous benefits that come with the right match of skills, values, and goals, and the huge cost of getting it wrong.

The organizational costs of having employees who are misfit are significant. Gallup estimates that actively disengaged employees cost the United States $450 to $550 billion in lost productivity per year (Borysenko 2015). And the problem is global. Unengaged employees in the United Kingdom cost their companies US$64.8 billion a year. In Japan, where only 9 percent of the workforce is engaged, lost productivity is estimated to be US$232 billion each year. A bad hire costs a company revenue, customers, and productivity, in addition to the hard costs of recruiting, training, and developing a new employee (as much as $50,000 in the United States), and the costs increase the longer a misfit employee is on the job (Gallup 2013). Getting fit right from the beginning, or at least ending poor work fit sooner, saves energy, time, money, and effort. Let’s look at some of the drivers of the cost of misfit.

Turnover

One of the easiest costs for organizations to quantify is employee turnover. When employees feel unmotivated and unhappy, they are much more likely to leave their job and employer. Turnover, both that which is initiated by the employee and that which is initiated by the company, has become a tremendous and troubling expense for organizations.

Because of differences in job complexity and skill levels, it’s tough to say precisely how much value an employer loses when a worker leaves. Turnover costs also vary by wage and the role of the employee, but in all cases it adds up to significant expense. A Center for American Progress study found that the average cost to replace an employee is 16 percent of the annual salary of those holding high-turnover, low-paying jobs and up to 213 percent of the annual salary of highly educated executives (Boushey and Glynn 2012).

And these costs may fail to include a full accounting of the impact. Josh Bersin (2013), a consultant who has spent years studying the subject, outlines factors a business should consider in calculating the real cost of losing an employee. These include:

• The cost of hiring the new employee, including advertising, interviewing, screening, and hiring.

• The cost of on-boarding the new person, including training and management time.

• Lost productivity: it may take the new employee one to two years to reach the productivity of an experienced person.

• Lost engagement: employees who see high turnover among coworkers tend to disengage and lose productivity.

• Customer service and errors: new employees take longer to perform a task and are often less adept at solving problems.

• Training cost: over two to three years a business is likely to invest 10 to 20 percent of the employee’s salary in training.

Beyond the detriment to the bottom line, turnover can damage team dynamics. The group loses not only rapport but the leaving employee’s unique expertise and contributions. Teams must also shoulder the burden of extra work until a replacement can be trained. Furthermore, losing talented, knowledgeable employees can be a drain on a company’s leadership pipeline, and rampant attrition can also take a toll on an organization’s carefully cultivated workplace culture. The dynamics of the organization, such as trust between employees, the degree to which conflict can be navigated, and clarity of purpose and direction, change every time an employee exits or enters.

The evidence is conclusive – to avoid the high costs and disruption of turnover, companies need to do a better job of insuring that hires are a good match for the requirements of the job and the culture of the organization. As employee tenure continues to shift from people who work at one place for 25 to 35 years to people changing jobs 11 times or more in their lifetime, employers will feel pressure to speed up recruitment and orientation processes to reduce the costs of turnover, but these costs will still exist in one form or another.

Absenteeism and Lost Productivity

Even if they don’t leave, employees who are misfit are likely to create significant costs because of their absenteeism. When they’re suffering from job misfit, employees are likely to miss more days of work. While injuries, illness, and medical appointments are the most commonly reported reasons for missing work, they are not always the actual reasons. In our experience, there are many other factors that cause employees to “call in sick.”

• Bullying and Harassment – Employees who are bullied or harassed by coworkers and/or bosses are more likely to call in sick to avoid the situation.

• Burnout, Stress, and Low Morale – Heavy workloads, stressful meetings or presentations, and feelings of being unappreciated can cause employees to avoid going into work. Personal stress (outside of work) can lead to absenteeism.

• Childcare and Eldercare – Employees may be forced to miss work in order to stay home and take care of a child or elder when normal arrangements have fallen through (for example, a sick caregiver or a snow day at school) or if a child or elder is sick.

• Depression –The National Institute of Mental Health asserts that the leading cause of absenteeism in the United States is depression. Depression can lead to substance abuse if people turn to drugs or alcohol to self-medicate their pain or anxiety. A study in 2010 indicated that depression caused $51.5 billion in indirect workplace costs because of absenteeism and “presenteeism” (reduced productivity while at work due to depression) (Robison 2010).

• Disengagement – Employees who aren’t committed to their jobs, coworkers, and/or the company are more likely to miss work simply because they have no motivation to go.

Absenteeism costs U.S. companies billions of dollars each year in lost productivity, wages, poor quality of goods and services, and excess management time. According to Absenteeism: The Bottom-Line Killer, a publication of workforce solution company Circadian (2005), unscheduled absenteeism costs roughly $3,600 per year for each hourly worker and $2,650 per year for salaried employees. In addition, the employees who do show up to work are often burdened with extra duties and responsibilities, which can lead to feelings of frustration and a decline in morale.

Service, Quality, and Safety

The benefits of fit extend to the way that employees create products and deliver services. Research has shown that positive employees do a better job producing quality products and creating satisfied customers. Conversely, it’s easy to imagine the potential outcomes from unhappy employees interacting with customers, making key decisions about quality, or evaluating product innovations. Poor quality, suboptimal manufacturing, and lost customers and revenue are all significant risks in such instances. A study by the consulting firm Denison tested the relationship between organizational culture and customer satisfaction using business-unit data from two different companies – a home-building company with multiple divisions and an automobile company with 148 dealerships. With a few exceptions, firms with higher culture scores had higher customer satisfaction ratings (Gillespie et al. 2007).

One positive example of the link between fit and service comes from Morrison Management Specialists, a company of more than 20,000 people that provides food, nutrition, and dining services to healthcare and senior living communities. Morrison recognized that their employees were the key assets and resources that would differentiate them from their competition. They undertook a number of activities, such as using virtual coaches and stay interviews (one-on-one conversations that reveal important ways to engage associates) to integrate talent-focused behaviors into the organization’s culture and subsequently increase employee engagement, decrease employee turnover, and improve overall operational effectiveness. Major organizational metrics were tracked from 2006 to 2010, including employee engagement, turnover rates, and patient or client satisfaction. Employee engagement rose approximately 30 percent, turnover rates dropped approximately 15 percent, and client satisfaction rates rose approximately 16 percent, an important outcome. “We have no other significant change to tie this metric change to except that we are doing this engagement initiative,” said Andrea Seidl, senior vice president at Morrison.

Similarly, at Saks Fifth Avenue, the luxury retailer based in New York, executives were looking for ways to boost service to customers in their highly competitive market. Saks officials decided to measure employee engagement and customer engagement at stores. Customer engagement included the willingness to make repeat purchases and recommend the store to friends.

Saks found that “there absolutely is a correlation between employee engagement and customer engagement” and that employee engagement creates loyal, repeat customers and increased sales (Bates 2004). Vice President Jay Redman indicated a 20 to 25 percent improvement in stores with great engagement.

A similar dynamic holds true for manufacturing firms. Companies with highly engaged workforces realize fewer quality defects, fewer safety incidents, and less waste. Beer manufacturer Molson Coors found that engaged employees were five times less likely than non-engaged employees to have a safety incident and seven times less likely to have a lost-time safety incident (Vance 2006).

Profitability

The bottom-line motivation for many organizations is to create profits to share with their stakeholders – investors, employees, and the community. In their global workforce study, Towers Watson (2012) found that companies with the lowest level of engagement had an average operating margin of 10 percent. Those with traditionally high engagement scores had a margin of 14 percent. The study found that companies with inspired employees – those who have not only the willingness but also the physical, emotional, and social energy to invest extra effort – have operating margins almost double those of companies with less-engaged employees.

When employees struggle from lack of fit they become indifferent toward their jobs – or worse, they outright loathe their work, supervisors, and organizations. They can cost their organizations money and can even destroy work units and businesses.

As one of our survey respondents said, “Work misfit, which for me is often caused by lack of challenges/interest in the job and/or micromanagement, often leads to a decline in my work productivity and possibly even quality, which leaves me feeling disappointed and unsatisfied, and doesn’t help the company either.”

Contrast this to a workforce filled with employees who are in jobs where they thrive and who are emotionally connected to the mission and purpose of their company. When employees are in the right environment they are passionate, creative, and entrepreneurial, and their enthusiasm fuels growth. These employees are involved in, enthusiastic about, and committed to their work and workplace, and they’re driving the innovation, growth, and revenue that their companies need. These employees are the foundation for a company that consistently wins. When employees are enrolled to contribute their highest and best work, companies simply do better.

ASK YOURSELF . . .

• How would my organization benefit from a greater focus on helping employees find their fit?

• What change could my company make that would delight me?

• How would that change impact my performance?

• How might that change impact the company’s business results?





