MODULE 5 MAIN IDEAS

KEY POINTS

• The key themes of The Road to Serfdom are the “attractions” of socialism,* the danger of economic planning,* and the historical evolution of socialism, particularly in Britain.

• Hayek’s core argument is that planned economies, despite their good intentions, eventually lead to the erosion of freedom and democracy.*

• The book is generally seen as an attack on socialism rather than as an endorsement of classical liberalism.*

Key Themes

The main themes of The Road to Serfdom are made clear by Friedrich Hayek’s organization of the book into three distinct parts. First he discusses what people think of as the attraction of socialism. In promising a utopia,* socialism had replaced liberalism* “as the doctrine held by the great majority of progressives.”1 Hayek argues that in fact socialism leads to the erosion of freedom, meaning that “to strive for it produces something so utterly different that few of those who now wish it would be prepared to accept the consequences.”2 Second, Hayek addresses the danger of planning.* With planning, “the state ceases to be a piece of utilitarian machinery … and becomes a ‘moral’ institution … which imposes on its members its views on all moral questions, whether these views be moral or highly immoral.”3 When the government controls the moral direction in society—effectively deciding what is right and what is wrong—it moves towards totalitarianism.*4 Finally, Hayek turns to signs of socialism in British society. He sees “the increasing veneration for the state” as a sign of increased totalitarianism. He also shows how people who fought Hitler had a positive view of socialism as well, despite the fact that, as far as Hayek is concerned, socialism and Nazism* share the same totalitarian foundation.

“If in the first attempt to create a world of free men we have failed, we must try again. The guiding principle that a policy of freedom for the individual is the only truly progressive policy remains as true today as it was in the nineteenth century.”

Friedrich Hayek, The Road to Serfdom



The book is organized chronologically, its 16 chapters covering the following three themes:

• The apparent attraction of socialism to a post-war society.

• The danger to a democratic society of economic planning.

• Creeping totalitarianism in British society—the book providing an assessment of the different signs of this phenomenon.

Within this framework, each of the 16 chapters can be read separately without the need to read the whole book.

Exploring The Ideas

Hayek’s core argument is that classical socialism inevitably leads to the erosion of freedom and democracy. From the start, he draws a comparison between the German Nazi regime and what he sees as the real threat of totalitarianism in Britain, writing: “The very magnitude of the outrages committed by the National Socialists has strengthened the assurance that a totalitarian system cannot happen here.”5 However, Hayek then goes on to say that “in the democracies at present, many who sincerely hate all of Nazism’s manifestations are working for ideals whose realization would lead straight to the abhorred tyranny.”6

At the center of Hayek’s argument is the fact that there are ways in which power can be corrupted in a classical socialist system, as in the use of central planning to control the economy. For him, planners “have the tragic illusion” that by transferring economic power from individuals to society they “extinguish that power” and the chance that it can be corrupted. But Hayek believes it is “not only transformed, but infinitely heightened.”7 This view—that planned economies concentrate the power of society into far fewer hands than a system driven by private enterprise—is captured in a single statement: “To decentralize power is to reduce the absolute amount of power, and the competitive system is the only system designed to minimize the power exercised by man over man.”8 In other words, to take economic power away from a central authority and let the market decide is the only way to reduce the power of one person over another.

Because planning tends to concentrate power by telling consumers and producers what they can buy and sell, Hayek argues that planned economies eventually lead to dictatorships. He says this because dictatorship* is the “most effective instrument of coercion and, as such, essential if central planning on a large scale is to be possible.”9

The idea that freedom and socialism are incompatible underpins Hayek’s suggestion that planning always leads to dictatorship. He argues that socialism actually changed the meaning of freedom in order to “harness to its cart the strongest of all political motives—the craving for freedom.”10 Instead of seeing individual freedom as “freedom from coercion” or the ability to act as you like in both political and economic life, Hayek says that socialists redefined freedom as “freedom from necessity.”11 The “false hope” that a planned economy would produce more economic output than the capitalist system is as powerful “as anything which drives us along the road to planning.”12 Throughout this whole argument, Hayek’s clear target is the British leadership and the British public.

Language And Expression

Hayek was aware that The Road to Serfdom was a polemical—that is, a controversial and critical—work. The book is mostly seen as an attack on socialism, rather than as an endorsement of classical liberalism. Its failure to show both aspects of Hayek’s message clearly is something of an obstacle to understanding the work, though not an i nsurmountable one.

Still, The Road to Serfdom should be seen as part of the debate between classical socialism and classical liberalism. Hayek identified himself clearly with the latter. The main criticism of the book is that Hayek makes too much of the danger of government planning. His overriding focus on this also leads him to ignore the issue of high taxation and its impact on certain aspects of socialist thinking. In the preface to the 1976 edition of the book, Hayek tries to put this mistake right by saying that there are two kinds of socialism: classical socialism, which focuses on government planning; and redistributive socialism, which looks to high taxes and a large welfare state.* Hayek believed that both schools led to the same negative outcome. But his ignorance of social democratic* societies, such as Sweden and West Germany, where his predicted negative outcomes didn’t materialize, could be seen as one of the book’s most serious flaws.

NOTES

1 F. A. Hayek, The Road to Serfdom: Texts and Documents – The Definitive Edition, ed. Bruce Caldwell (Chicago, IL: Chicago University Press, 2008), 76.

2 Hayek, The Road to Serfdom, 82.

3 Hayek, The Road to Serfdom, 115.

4 Hayek, The Road to Serfdom, 194.

5 F. A. Hayek, The Road to Serfdom—Condensed Version (Reader’s Digest, 1999), 39.

6 Hayek, The Road to Serfdom—Condensed Version, 40.

7 Hayek, The Road to Serfdom—Condensed Version, 40.

8 Hayek, The Road to Serfdom—Condensed Version, 41.

9 Hayek, The Road to Serfdom—Condensed Version, 50.

10 Hayek, The Road to Serfdom—Condensed Version, 47.

11 Hayek, The Road to Serfdom—Condensed Version, 48.

12 Hayek, The Road to Serfdom—Condensed Version, 48.





