MODULE 1 THE AUTHOR AND THE HISTORICAL CONTEXT

KEY POINTS

• The Road to Serfdom is a key work in the study of political and economic institutions, particularly in the debate between market-based and planned economies.*

• Friedrich Hayek witnessed first-hand the emergence of totalitarianism* in Europe, and wanted to write a book warning Britain of the dangers of totalitarian rule.

• Hayek was an economist, but he was concerned about the wider effects of too much government intervention in economic planning.

Why Read this Text?

Friedrich Hayek lived between 1899 and 1992, and his 1944 book The Road to Serfdom is one of the most popular economics works of the twentieth century. It remains an important part of economic and political debate today. Its central argument—that planned economies inevitably lead to reductions in individual freedom and eventually to totalitarian rule—has played a significant role in the politics of the United States and Europe since its publication, inspiring leaders such as Ronald Reagan* and Margaret Thatcher* to put in place policies intended to shrink the state and limit the role of government in economic life. Politicians and commentators still frequently refer to the book as a warning against excessive government power.

The most pessimistic part of Hayek’s argument is not, however, supported by any evidence. As the economist Robert Solow* writes: “It would be perverse to read the history, as of 1944 or as of now, as suggesting that the standard regulatory interventions in the economy have any inherent tendency to snowball into ‘serfdom’ … Hayek’s implicit prediction is a failure.”1 In this way, Hayek’s suggestion that the rule of law* and democracy* are incompatible with government interference in the economy may well have been proven to be false. But even so, it is still true that the book has played a real role in shifting the balance of economic power from the state to the markets, particularly in Britain and the United States.

“It It is true that the virtues which are less esteemed and practiced now—independence, self-reliance, and the willingness to bear risks, the readiness to back one’s own conviction against a majority, and the willingness to voluntary cooperation with one’s neighbors—are essentially those on which the working of an individualist society rests. Collectivism has nothing to put in their place, and in so far as it already has destroyed them it has left a void filled by nothing but the demand for obedience and the compulsion of the individual to what is collectively decided to be good.”

Friedrich Hayek, The Road to Serfdom



Author’s Life

Hayek was born in Vienna and was educated as an economist in both Austria and the United States. In 1931 he moved to Britain, where he was appointed professor of economics at the London School of Economics and Political Science (LSE).* He worked there until 1950, when he moved to the United States to become professor of economics at the University of Chicago, then in 1962 he moved to Freiburg University in Germany, where he spent the rest of his academic career. Jointly with the Swedish economist Gunnar Myrdal, Hayek received the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences2 in 1974. Both Hayek and Myrdal studied the relationship between economics and the social and political sciences,* which is where the study of society and government meet. Apparently, the Prize Committee “initially intended to award the prize to Myrdal but was persuaded to balance his support for significant government involvement in the economy by choosing Hayek to share the prize.”3

The Road to Serfdom was written during World War II,* when the lse had been evacuated out of London to Peterhouse College at Cambridge University. During the war Hayek was not a part of the British war effort, despite having become a naturalized British* citizen in 1938. For that reason, he had more time to write, as teaching was partially suspended because of the war. At this time he also felt he “had come to master English, in the sense that [he] got enjoyment in writing in English.”4 Hayek’s experience of reading and working in both German and English allowed him to bring some of the Austrian ideas associated with economics to an English-speaking audience in London.

Author’s Background

The Road to Serfdom was shaped by political events in Europe between World War I* and World War II. This period was one of great intellectual and social upheaval, leading to the rise of both socialist* and fascist* political movements throughout Europe. Hayek witnessed first-hand the development of anti-democratic forces in Vienna after World War I, at a time when attempts to create a democratic state in Austria had resulted in both Communists and National Socialists (Nazis)* gaining political influence. For example, the University of Vienna, where Hayek studied in the 1920s, was fertile ground for antidemocratic ideas and was temporarily shut down due to conflict. He feared that after World War II Britain would succumb to similar antidemocratic forces as a result of increased government powers. In The Road to Serfdom, he warned that “there is more than a superficial similarity between the trend of thought in Germany during and after the last war [i.e. World War I] and the present current of ideas in the democracies.”5

The book was written as a guidebook for the British economy after World War II. When the text was written, in 1944, the thrust of intellectual thought in Britain was towards economic planning, where the government plays a much more active role in directing the economy. The entire Labour Party* and certain elements within the Conservative Party* in Great Britain agreed that there should be a greater interest in economic planning. These were not fixed ideas, but it was generally accepted that things could not go the same way as they had after World War I, when economic depression and unemployment had quickly set in. For that reason, the wartime coalition* government commissioned the economist and social reformer William Beveridge* to write a report on how the post-war state should be organized. The Beveridge Report* is commonly thought to have signaled the beginning of the British welfare state.* The Road to Serfdom is, therefore, the result of Hayek feeling alienated from what he saw as creeping socialism in Britain, as well as of his concerns about the implications of totalitarianism.

NOTES

1 Robert Solow, “Hayek, Friedman, and the Illusions of Conservative Economics,” New Republic, http://www.newrepublic.com/article/books-and-arts/magazine/110196/hayek-friedman-and-the-illusions-conservative-economics last accessed March 5, 2015.

2 Gunnar Wetterberg, Pengarna & Makten: Riksbankens historia (Stockholm: Sveriges Riksbank i samarbete med Atlantis, 2009), 374.

3 Marilu Hurt-McCarty, The Nobel Laureates: How the World’s Greatest Economic Minds Shaped Modern Thought (New York: McGraw-Hill, 2000), 242.

4 F. A. Hayek, Hayek on Hayek: An Autobiographical Dialogue – The Collected Works of F. A. Hayek, ed. Stephen Kresge and Leif Wenar (London: Routledge, 1994), 101.

5 F.A. Hayek, The Road to Serfdom: Texts and Documents – The Definitive Edition, ed. Bruce Caldwell (Chicago, IL: Chicago University Press, 2008), 58.





