MODULE 8 PLACE IN THE AUTHOR’S WORK

KEY POINTS

• The Road to Serfdom is closely related to Hayek’s other academic works, though it would be an overstatement to say it is a distillation of his life’s work.

• Like Hayek’s entire career, this book is closely associated with the principles of the Austrian School of Economics, with its emphasis on the importance of individual behavior rather than social structures.

• Hayek’s contribution to “linking economic, social and institutional phenomena” was rewarded in 1974, when he was jointly (with Gunnar Myrdal) awarded the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences.

Positioning

The Road to Serfdom is the first attempt by Friedrich Hayek to express a coherent political argument rather than an economic one. Yet it also builds on his previous works criticizing socialism,* so it is a logical progression. It is not, however, a distillation of a lifetime’s work, but the first thing the author contributed to the debate as a political philosopher.1 Hayek’s career lasted from the 1920s to the 1980s, but it was only after he wrote The Road to Serfdom that he became “Hayek the thinker” rather than “Hayek the economist” in public debate. The book also anticipated later writings such as The Constitution of Liberty (1960) and The Fatal Conceit (1988), which laid out reasons why intellectuals were often attracted to socialism.

The Road to Serfdom came about before Hayek made efforts to construct a system that would maximize freedom in society. In this book, though, he was already starting to form ideas about what he called “spontaneous order.” As he explained: “The fundamental principle that in the ordering of our affairs we should make as much use as possible of the spontaneous forces of society, and resort as little as possible to coercion, is capable of an infinite variety of application.”2 His work is intellectually consistent, but it is not simply a presentation of new ideas—rather, it is an argument against popular ideas expressed at the time. Hayek also thought of adding a postscript to the book after the Labour Party* won the British general election in 1945, exploring how this would change the political landscape. But he eventually abandoned the idea.

“Hayek, in my view, is the leading economic thinker of the twentieth century”

Vernon Smith, Nobel Prize-winning economist,

“Reflections on Human Action after 50 Years”



Integration

Hayek’s intellectual thinking took in many ideas, but it united around the core ideas of the Austrian School of Economics, where Hayek was a leading figure. According to the economist Peter Boettke, one of the key characteristics of the Austrian School is the idea that “social institutions are often the result of human action, but not of human design.”3 For example, in his 1948 book Individualism and Economic Order, Hayek tells a story of a student walking through snow. This student cuts across the snowy lawn to get to class sooner, and the footprints he leaves encourage others to follow. Eventually, a path has formed that all students can use to cross the lawn. The path didn’t happen because someone had planned it—it developed organically from the first student’s impulsive decision. Hayek calls this “path in the snow” story a simple example of a “product of human action, but not of design.”4 With this in mind, it is possible to see how Hayek’s criticism of socialism* may have emerged from a similar seed. Hayek’s view of planning is that too much design inhibits the natural flow of economic life.

Hayek’s skepticism* about scientific knowledge, particularly when it is applied to social matters, relates indirectly to The Road to Serfdom. According to Peter Boettke, another of the beliefs of the Austrian School is that “the ‘facts’ of the social sciences are what people believe and think,” rather than objective truth.5 In his 1974 Nobel Prize lecture, Hayek addressed what he called the “pretense of knowledge.” He was talking in particular about the difficulty of inferring anything about policy outcomes from studying economic data. In the social sciences, only some aspects of a complicated process can be turned into quantitative data. Take the example of the relationship between aggregate demand—the total demand of a given society—and unemployment. The data we have only tell part of the story. As Hayek writes: “The correlation between aggregate demand and total employment, for instance, may only be approximate, but as it is the only one on which we have quantitative data, it is accepted as the only causal connection that counts.”6 In other words, there may be many “aggregate demands” in reality, but we are only able to observe one, so therefore our conclusions are as uncertain as that data point.

Hayek is uncertain about the relationship between economic knowledge and policy outcomes and this is why he challenges the whole idea of planning in the first place. His criticism of planning is that it assumes the economic planner knows more than he actually does and so gives him more authority than he truly merits.

Significance

The Road to Serfdom established Hayek as “the world’s leading classic liberal.”7 If they know anything at all about Hayek, most people who are not economists would most likely think of The Road to Serfdom in connection with him, as is by far Hayek’s most widely read work. Economists, however, see this book as just one of many of his influential works. When Hayek was awarded a Nobel Prize in 1974, it was for his “penetrating analysis of the interdependence of economic, social and institutional phenomena.” These topics all play an important role in The Road to Serfdom, but they also appear throughout his work.8 If it weren’t for his extensive writing on knowledge in society and his important contributions to the debates on monetary policy and economic fluctuations, Hayek would be far less influential.

Hayek’s critique of socialism included the important idea that central planners could not possibly have to hand all the information about the economy that was necessary to make sound decisions. This idea has been so widely embraced among economists that it is now almost considered common sense. Jeffrey Sachs,* for example, noted how economists were often unable to identify sound investments: “If you ask an economist where’s a good place to invest, which industries are going to grow, where the specialization is going to occur, the track record is pretty miserable. Economists don’t collect the on-the-ground information businessmen do. Every time Poland asks, Well, what are we going to be able to produce? I say I don’t know.”9

NOTES

1 Alan Ebenstein, Friedrich Hayek: A Biography (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2001).

2 F. A. Hayek, The Road to Serfdom: Texts and Documents – The Definitive Edition, ed. Bruce Caldwell (Chicago, IL: Chicago University Press, 2008), 71.

3 Peter Boettke, “Austrian School of Economics,” Library of Economics and Liberty, http://www.econlib.org/library/Enc/AustrianSchoolofEconomics.html, accessed March 5, 2015.

4 F. A. Hayek, Individualism and Economic Order (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1948), 7.

5 Boettke, “Austrian School.”

6 F.A. Hayek, “Prize Lecture: The Pretense of Knowledge,” http://www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/economic-sciences/laureates/1974/hayek-lecture.html, accessed March 6, 2015.

7 “Friedrich August Hayek,” Library of Economics and Liberty, http://www.econlib.org/library/Enc/bios/Hayek.html, accessed March 8, 2015.

8 ”Friedrich August von Hayek - Facts”. Nobelprize.org. Nobel Media AB 2014, http://www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/economic-sciences/laureates/1974/hayek-facts.html, accessed March 8, 2015.

9 “Interview: Jeffrey Sachs,” Omni 13, no. 9 (1991), 79.





