MODULE 10 THE EVOLVING DEBATE

KEY POINTS

• The Road to Serfdom started a move in economic research towards fighting inflation where it had previously focused on fighting unemployment.

• The work is associated with the liberal or neo-liberal school in economics, which is in favor of a small state structure and as little interference in the economy as possible.

• Modern thinkers who admire Hayek use the book to illustrate their concerns about the dominating power of institutions such as the European Union (EU).*

Uses And Problems

It is hard to overstate the importance of Friedrich Hayek’s The Road to Serfdom, both in public debate and in the evolution of economics. The book played a part in the British general election campaign of 1945 when it was talked about by Prime Minister Sir Winston Churchill,* and it effectively reintroduced the idea of classical liberalism* into British political debate. It also helped to reignite the study of economic liberalism* as Hayek himself established the Mont Pelerin Society,*an international group of academics who were invited “to discuss the state and possible fate of liberalism.”1 The society’s first meeting was held in 1947 in Switzerland, and before the conference got under way, Hayek outlined the society’s aims in a memo. According to him, the society existed because if Europe were not to enter a “new kind of serfdom, an intense intellectual effort is needed.”2 Since its foundation, besides Hayek himself, the society has had seven Nobel laureates as members.

“Hayek’s powerful Road to Serfdom left a permanent mark on my own political character, making me a longterm optimist for free enterprise and liberty.”

Margaret Thatcher, The Downing Street Years



The most important practical economic effect of The Road to Serfdom was that it started a shift in research from fighting unemployment—as John Maynard Keynes* proposed—to fighting inflation instead. This was not an idea that was concretely suggested in the book, but it was alluded to when Hayek attacked the idea of economic planning.* “If we are determined not to allow unemployment at any price, and are not willing to use coercion, we shall be driven to all sorts of desperate expedients,” he warned.3

The text has also fuelled a wider intellectual debate, because Hayek’s work in many ways reflected the thinking of the Austrian School of Economics,* which also influenced the Chicago School of Economics. Both schools were behind the idea of fighting inflation by controlling the supply of money, rather than by reducing unemployment. The us government embraced this approach during the presidency of Ronald Reagan* at the same time as the book was having a major influence on the British government led by Margaret Thatcher.*

After Hayek’s death in 1992, the book also had an impact in those formerly communist* countries that had once been behind the Iron Curtain*. Czech Republic President Václav Havel* contemplated the idea that the country’s new senate should be based on “Friedrich Hayek’s idea of a division of functions.”4 The book also contributed to the common belief that socialism* was incompatible with maintaining democracy* and private ownership.

Schools Of Thought

The Road to Serfdom has inspired many different writers and thinkers. These include British Prime Minister Sir Winston Churchill* and the founder of the Institute of Economic Affairs,* Sir Antony Fisher. American Senator Barry Goldwater*—the 1964 Republican Presidential candidate against Lyndon Johnson*—named Thomas Jefferson as his favorite president and Friedrich Hayek as his favorite political philosopher.5 Many have argued that Goldwater’s 1964 book The Conscience of a Conservative built on the argument introduced by Hayek in The Road to Serfdom that the duty of government is to safeguard freedom. Goldwater’s disciples included future presidents Ronald Reagan* and George H.W. Bush.* Both were also influenced by Hayek.

The school of thought that formed around these ideas could be characterized as favoring liberal or neo-liberal* economics. This is an approach that advocates a small state structure and as little interference in the economy as possible. Politically, this school of thought was most clearly represented by Reagan and British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher.* Neo-liberals adopted the ideas in The Road to Serfdom, while both customizing and modernizing them. In 1983 American Republican congressman and Hayek supporter Newt Gingrich suggested to Reagan that he should freeze the budget in order to reduce the budget deficit, which at the time was growing. In his diary Reagan described the plan to freeze the budget as “a tempting idea except that it would cripple our defense program.” Reagan adapted Hayek’s proposal for a smaller government to make it fit with the geopolitical* problems he was facing in the context of the Cold War.*6

Hayek’s supporters modernized his ideas by suggesting that a system of government welfare should be organized in such a way that it demanded something in return from those who received that welfare. Ideas like these were of interest both to the British Conservative* governments under prime ministers Thatcher and John Major*, and also to the New Democrats* in the United States. There were also traces of this thinking in the Big Society* philosophy proposed by the Conservative–Liberal Democrat coalition government that was in power in the UK until May 2015. In the spirit of Hayek, that coalition’s manifesto claimed: “Our government will be a much smarter one, shunning the bureaucratic levers of the past and finding intelligent ways to encourage, support, and enable people to make better choices for themselves.”7

In Current Scholarship

Current supporters of The Road to Serfdom believe the powers of the state can still be excessive and therefore also dangerous. The book does not anticipate modern events such as the “War on Terror,”* but modern supporters would think of the American-led anti-“terrorist” actions throughout the Middle East to which that term refers as a perfect expression of the totalitarian* tendencies Hayek was warning against. They say this danger has shown itself in a number of ways—in excessive taxation, in excessively harsh legislation,* and in international federalism,* particularly with regard to the powers of the EU. The Road to Serfdom fits into the belief system of those who favor a small state with limited powers. Such people also agree with international cooperation, but only to the extent that it enhances free trade. It would be possible to argue that modern disciples of the book are highly critical of the eu, which they see as an international organization with excessive powers. Supporters of Hayek therefore make use of the book by applying his fear about excessive government power to a modern context.

Whether Hayek’s followers have managed to convince people of the truth of his arguments is hard to say right now. The success of Hayek’s ideas could have been greatly increased by a Republican* win in the us presidential elections of 2012. But it could also be argued that Hayek’s modern following has greatly increased with the birth in 2009 of the US Tea Party movement,* which advocates public spending cuts and a reduction in the size of the US government.

NOTES

1 “About MPS,” The Mont Pelerin Society website, https://www.montpelerin.org/montpelerin/mpsAbout.html, accessed January 25, 2014.

2 Cited in Alan Ebenstein, Friedrich Hayek: A Biography (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2001), 143.

3 F. A. Hayek, The Road to Serfdom: Texts and Documents – The Definitive Edition, ed. Bruce Caldwell (Chicago, IL: Chicago University Press, 2008), 214.

4 Václav Havel, To the Castle and Back (London: Portobello, 2008), 180.

5 Lee Edwards, Goldwater (Washington, DC: Regnery, 1995), 281.

6 Ronald Reagan, The Reagan Diaries, ed. Douglas Brinkley (New York: HarperCollins, 2007), 123.

7 “The Coalition: Our Programme for Government,” https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/78977/coalition_programme_for_government.pdf, accessed March 8, 2015.





