MODULE 4 THE AUTHOR’S CONTRIBUTION

KEY POINTS

• Hayek argues that democracy* can only function when supported by a free-market economy.*

• It could be argued that The Road to Serfdom was more a book about a political debate at the time than an academic work about the economy.

• Many economists were looking at the issue of whether a planned economy* was a good thing, but only Hayek’s book appealed to a wide audience.

Author’s Aims

Friedrich Hayek’s main aim in writing The Road to Serfdom was to attack “what [he] called classical socialism,* aimed mainly at the nationalization or socialization of the means of production.”1 Hayek believed democracy could only survive when it was “allied with freedom of choice that inheres [i.e. exists] in a market system.”2

Hayek had intended the work to be part of a book project he had begun planning in the 1930s that he referred to as The Abuse of Reason. The Road to Serfdom was supposed to be the second in a three-part series, the first titled Hubris of Reason and the third The Nemesis of the Planned Society, neither of which were ever completed.

Although Hayek did not follow the original aims of the project, he did succeed in making the book both a critique of and a warning against future planning,* which he believed led to totalitarianism*. The Road to Serfdom is part of a logical plan to attack socialism and warn against government control, using the concrete examples of Germany and the Soviet Union.* But it departs from the original aims of the Abuse of Reason project because it doesn’t provide an alternative to classical socialism, so it could be argued that it is more of a polemic, or an attack, rather than a manifesto—a plan for what should happen.

“When Hitler came into power in Germany, I had already been teaching at the University of London for several years, but I kept in close touch with affairs on the Continent and was able to do so until the outbreak of war. What I had thus seen of the origins and evolution of various totalitarian movements made me feel that English public opinion, particularly among my friends who held ‘advanced’ views on social matters, completely misconceived the nature of those movements.”

Friedrich Hayek, The Road to Serfdom



Approach

In addressing his core questions, Hayek’s focus is on Germany and on similar ideologies that were present in Britain at the time, though there are also several references to the Soviet Union. In each chapter of The Road to Serfdom the core question—concerning why political planning threatens democracy—is addressed with references and opening quotations. The major weakness of this approach is that the book’s style gradually falls into the category of contemporary political debate rather than into that of academic enquiry. But Hayek is intent on discussing the general character of the topic, and to this extent this book is different from previous works.

In one sense, making a connection between German fascism* and socialism in Britain was the secret of the book’s success. At the time it was published, during World War II* in 1944, British citizens were all too aware of the dangers of fascism. The dangers of socialism, on the other hand, were much farther from public consciousness.

Hayek did not shy away from being argumentative, and the book’s tone often reflects how serious things were at the time. According to the British newspaper The Times, Hayek’s “most famous book now seems unduly gloomy about the prospects of a collapse of civil society under the burden of the welfare state.”3 But the author succeeded in producing a work that was a warning, not a prediction. Hayek also accepted that the book was certain to “offend many people with whom [he wished] to live on friendly terms.”4 In 1956, he said that at first “the book was taken in the spirit in which it was written,”5 though he was fully prepared for the academic criticism the book received in Britain.

Contribution In Context

The Road to Serfdom does not contain a set of ideas that are Hayek’s alone. According to British historian Richard Cockett, with the renewed interest in “the planning versus private enterprise debate, many economists rushed into print on the subject towards the end of the war.”6 Economists who were against planning all agreed that it would be a danger to democracy. But Hayek’s is the only work that became popular with the wider public, influencing public opinion on a large scale. It is unique because it is aimed at a wider audience than just economists, and presents the reader with an understanding of European, British and American philosophy, history and economic thought.

In some ways, the book was ahead of its time. In 1944, the most widely held view was that capitalism* was in crisis and that central planning was a workable alternative to ease the suffering caused by the capitalist system. The book set out to speak to a huge number of young men and women who had learned to distrust capitalism in the 1930s because of the economic depression and the unemployment it had brought. And Hayek succeeded in reaching his target audience. In 1944, an initial print run of 2,000 copies of The Road to Serfdom sold out within a month. The text was also quoted in parliament, which led to Hayek being invited to lecture in the United States. The University of Chicago Press estimated in the introduction to the 2007 edition that 350,000 copies of the book had been sold to date.7

NOTES

1 F. A. Hayek, Hayek on Hayek: An Autobiographical Dialogue – The Collected Works of F. A. Hayek, ed. Stephen Kresge and Leif Wenar (London: Routledge, 1994), 108.

2 Bruce Caldwell, Hayek’s Challenge: An Intellectual Biography of F. A. Hayek (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 2004), 240.

3 “Maestro of Economics,” The Times, March 25, 1992.

4 F. A. Hayek, “Preface to the Original Editions,” in F. A. Hayek, The Road to Serfdom: Texts and Documents – The Definitive Edition, ed. Bruce Caldwell (Chicago, IL: Chicago University Press, 2008), 37.

5 F.A. Hayek, “Foreword to the 1956 American Paperback Edition,” in Hayek, The Road to Serfdom, 238.

6 Richard Cockett, Thinking the Unthinkable: Think Tanks and the Economic Counter-Revolution, 1931–1983 (London: HarperCollins, 1994), 79.

7 “The Publication History of The Road to Serfdom,” University of Chicago Press website, excerpted from Bruce Caldwell, “Introduction,” in Hayek, The Road to Serfdom, http://press.uchicago.edu/Misc/Chicago/320553.html, accessed January 25, 2014.





