MODULE 11 IMPACT AND INFLUENCE TODAY

KEY POINTS

• Both The Road to Serfdom and John Maynard Keynes’s* General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money were consulted as economic guides for how to approach the 2007–8 financial crisis.*

• Some people believed that British New Labour* in the 1990s accepted Hayek’s view that equality was not desirable.

• In the aftermath of the financial crisis, some have put forward the idea that greater equality benefits society as a whole.

Position

Friedrich Hayek’s The Road to Serfdom is still relevant today in a number of different ways. Together with John Maynard Keynes’s The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money, it has been widely read in recent times as a kind of guidebook to where contemporary economics is, and where it fits into the world of politics. Modern economics in the public arena revolves around spending, or spending cuts, and an understanding of The Road to Serfdom is essential for understanding how this issue evolved in a historical sense.

From the economic crisis of 2007–8 onwards, many ways of thinking about economic policy-making can be traced back either to Keynes or to Hayek. For example, the British Chancellor of the Exchequer at the time of the crisis, Alistair Darling,* at first thought that “the Keynesian approach would prevail” as a response to the crisis, and that governments would intervene to get things back to normal. But as he later acknowledged in his memoirs, “in Europe there followed a reaction, both political and economic, that owed much more to Hayek than to Keynes.”1 This interpretation of Hayek is captured in Nicholas Wapshott’s 2011 work Keynes–Hayek: The Clash that Defined Modern Economics. In a review of the book, Hayek’s views were explained as “upholding a pure free-market doctrine, in which economic salvation comes through faith, not works—and especially not public works.”2 Hayek’s work has clearly been revived in current political debate.

“Socialism is a philosophy of failure, the creed of ignorance, and the gospel of envy, its inherent virtue is the equal sharing of misery.”

Sir Winston Churchill, in a speech



Yet the views of modern supporters of The Road to Serfdom often clash with the original intentions of the book. Such people tend to be professed neo-conservatives* or conservatives,* while Hayek never saw himself as a conservative and even objected to being called one. Although Hayek originally intended his book to be a work of liberal ideology, it has been transformed into a work of conservative ideology, which throws up several challenges when it comes to understanding the work in the context of today’s world, while still remaining true to its original spirit.

Interaction

The Road to Serfdom still poses a challenge to socialism* and social democracy,* as well as to Keynesian economics.* When in the 1990s British Labour politician Peter Mandelson* declared that New Labour* was “intensely relaxed about people getting filthy rich,” his comments could be interpreted as an acceptance of Hayek’s idea that equality was not a desirable goal.3 In this way—and as The Road to Serfdom said—the left “accepted the imperfection of the market, since economic activity took place between consumers with imperfect knowledge.”4

The book was also used to challenge communist* ideology during the Cold War,* and still does so where such thinking still exists today. It was reprinted in several countries during the Cold-War period and understandably had a major renaissance after Hayek was jointly awarded the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences in 1974. The University of Chicago Press, which published the book in the United States, estimated that between 1944 and 1994 the book sold over a quarter of a million copies.5 There were also illegal printings of the book from behind the Iron Curtain* during the Cold War. In the words of economist Milton Friedman,* “there is little doubt that Hayek’s writings, and especially this book, were an important intellectual source of the disintegration of faith in communism behind the Iron Curtain.”6

The Continuing Debate

The ideas presented in The Road to Serfdom came to dominate between the end of the Cold War and the economic crisis of 2007–8.* However, in the light of the crisis, the text’s basic ideas were challenged. In 2009, The Spirit Level: Why Equality is Better for Everyone by Richard G. Wilkinson and Kate Pickett argued that equality was economically beneficial to society as a whole. This was an intellectual attempt to go against the general idea proposed by Hayek that trying to establish equality can be dangerous for society because it threatens democracy.

The revival of political Keynesianism—the idea that the government should intervene in difficult economic times—can also be seen as a response to Hayek’s ideas. Keynes’s biographer, the historian Robert Skidelsky, claimed that “except for Hayekian fanatics, it seems obvious that the coordinated global stimulus of 2009 stopped the slide into another Great Depression.”7 Skidelsky was referring to the fact that governments did indeed interfere in their economies—by bailing out banks and approving significant fiscal stimulus packages—to avert an even greater disaster.

But this was not so much a direct, coordinated attack on Hayek as a series of spontaneous responses to the economic crisis. The motives behind the responses can be divided into intellectual, professional, personal, and political. Supporters of a larger state saw the crisis as a way to question the core of Hayek’s argument from a philosophical point of view. There were professional and personal motives in the case of Skidelsky, much of whose work focuses on Keynes. And there were political motives among socialists and social democrats* who wanted to use the crisis to gain credibility for their political beliefs.

NOTES

1 Alistair Darling, Back from the Brink: 1000 Days at Number 11 (London: Atlantic Books, 2011), xviii.

2 Peter Clarke, “Keynes–Hayek by Nicholas Wapshott – Review,” Guardian, February 3, 2012, http://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/feb/03/keynes-hayek-nicholas-wapshott-review, accessed January 24, 2014.

3 Steve Hart, “Equality Must Be at the Centre of a Vision for a Better Society,” New Statesman, September 11, 2012, http://www.newstatesman.com/blogs/economics/2012/09/equality-must-be-centre-vision-better-society, accessed January 24, 2014.

4 Kevin Hickson, “Economic Thought,” in New Labour, Old Labour: The Wilson and Callaghan Governments, 1974–79, ed. Anthony Seldon and Kevin Hickson (London: Routledge, 2004), 36.

5 Milton Friedman, “Introduction to the 1994 Edition,” in F. A. Hayek, The Road to Serfdom: Texts and Documents – The Definitive Edition, ed. Bruce Caldwell (Chicago, IL: Chicago University Press, 2008), 264.

6 Friedman, “Introduction to the 1994 Edition,” 264.

7 Robert Skidelsky, “The Keynes–Hayek Rematch,” Project Syndicate, August 19, 2011, http://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/the-keynes-hayek-rematch, accessed January 24, 2014.





