MODULE 7 ACHIEVEMENT

KEY POINTS

• Hayek was very successful in presenting a challenge to socialism* that would be heard by the world.

• Conservatives* still refer to The Road to Serfdom when they are looking to oppose a government’s role in the economy.

• To fully understand the book, readers need to have a relatively deep background knowledge of Hayek and the times he experienced.

Assessing The Argument

Friedrich Hayek was very successful in The Road to Serfdom in achieving his core aim of presenting an intellectual challenge to socialism.* The aftershocks of that challenge can still be felt today in policy discussions, as well as in the academic world. The book has had a huge influence in a number of disciplines, including history, economics and philosophy. It does not fit firmly within one single discipline, and scholars in a number of different areas have explored and adopted its ideas. Public choice theory*—the idea that politicians and members of the public sector act out of self-interest,* just like those in the private sector—is an attempt to apply classical liberal economics to political science, and it can be traced back to Hayek’s ideas. The Road to Serfdom has been called “an excellent example of early Austrian contribution to public choice theory” because Hayek showed that one effect of socialism “is evident in the growth of special interest groups.”1 In other words, focusing on the incentives of planners in a socialist society, Hayek described how governmental interventions in the economy could be used as instruments of power for particular groups in society. This transformation of democratic institutions into servants of particular interest groups, Hayek believed, would empower such groups and lead to the erosion of democracy.

“Over the years, I have again and again asked fellow believers in a free society how they managed to escape the contagion of their collectivist intellectual environment. No name has been mentioned more often as the source of enlightenment and understanding than Friedrich Hayek’s. I, like others, owe him a great debt … [he has helped me] to broaden and deepen my understanding of the meaning and the requisites of a free society.”

Milton Friedman, foreword in Fritz Machlup, Essays on Hayek



Adaptations of Hayek’s ideas such as the formulation of public choice theory led people to rethink the need for a public sector, and indirectly led to increased privatization* of industries previously owned by the government. They also led to the reform of the public sector, first in the western world and then, after the end of the Cold War,* in much of the rest of the world. Hayek’s ideas provided an alternative to political socialism and to the idea of the large state as a goal in itself. They also contributed to a change in how people saw the role of government.

Achievement In Context

In 1945, despite paper being scarce, the British Conservative Party* used its supply “so that abridged copies [of The Road to Serfdom] could be printed as campaign literature.”2 By the 1960s, Hayek’s ideas were considered outmoded, with the British political philosopher Anthony Quinton* describing him as a “magnificent dinosaur.”3 But since the 1970s, Hayek and his book have experienced a renaissance that has lasted until the present day. The book is still regarded as relevant in terms of its political importance, its ability to attract supporters of views shared by Hayek, and its status as a source of controversial economic history.

Conservatives in many different political situations refer to the book, especially when they want to oppose liberal policies that increase the government’s role in the economy. When Chicago economist Milton Friedman* wrote the introduction to the 50th-anniversary edition of the book in 1994, he declared that “we badly need a new book … that will give as clear and penetrating insight into the intellectual developments of the past quarter century as The Road to Serfdom does of earlier developments.”4 The book is now seen even more as an ideological inspiration because it has been the center of so much debate. In 2012 it featured in a bbc documentary about Hayek, and Time magazine cited it as one of the works that former Republican vice-presidential nominee Paul Ryan* regularly re-reads.5

Limitations

The Road to Serfdom has a certain limitation as a political book rooted in the context of the period between World War I* and World War II.* Hayek wrote from his own experience in 1920s and 1930s Vienna and from what he had read about Nazi Germany* and the Soviet Union.* This makes the book difficult to understand if you are not familiar with the period. Its ideas are also hard to apply in a non-European, non-American or modern context and demand a broad knowledge of European history, philosophy and economic research.

To understand its social context, the reader must know about Hayek’s upbringing, the period when his interest in philosophy, law, psychology and economics began. These were the subjects he would write about in The Road to Serfdom. It is also important to know that, unlike many in his generation, Hayek spent time as a visiting scholar in the United States before returning to Austria. This meant he had already experienced Anglo-Saxon culture before he moved to London.

The reader should also take into account the fact that Hayek witnessed the rise of communism* in Russia and that of fascism* and Nazism* in Italy, Austria and Germany. This convinced him of the similarities between all three ideologies.

Finally, we need to look at the cultural context to fully understand the work as a whole. Hayek saw the German culture of including the state in all aspects of the life of the individual as potentially representing the beginning of a totalitarian state.* He contrasted this “idea of a political party which embraces all activities of the individual from the cradle to the grave”6 with the idea of Anglo-Saxon individualism, politically translated into economic liberalism.* The difference between the two needs to be understood if a reader is to grasp one of the book’s most important themes.

NOTES

1 Peter J. Boettke and Peter T. Leeson, “An ‘Austrian’ Perspective on Public Choice,” in Encyclopedia of Public Choice, eds Charles K. Rowley and Friedrich Schneider (Boston, MA: Kluwer, 2003).

2 David Willetts, “The New Conservatism? 1945–1951,” in Recovering Power: The Conservatives in Opposition since 1867, eds Stuart Ball and Anthony Seldon (Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2005), 171.

3 Anthony Quinton, ed., Political Philosophy (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1967), 2.

4 Milton Friedman, “Introduction to the 1994 Edition,” in F. A. Hayek, The Road to Serfdom: Texts and Documents – The Definitive Edition, ed. Bruce Caldwell (Chicago, IL: Chicago University Press, 2008), 262.

5 Michael Crowley, “The Big Idea Guy,” Time Magazine, September 3, 2012, http://www.content.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,2122768,00.html, accessed January 24, 2014.

6 F. A. Hayek, The Road to Serfdom: Texts and Documents – The Definitive Edition, ed. Bruce Caldwell (Chicago, IL: Chicago University Press, 2008), 144.





