Acknowledgments

Thank you:

First and foremost, to my brilliant agent Hattie Grünewald. For believing in Broken Country on the strength of a ten-thousand-word submission and helping me shape it through your thoughtful edits into the vision we shared. Thanks, too, for your calm and wise advice and your constancy; it has been a joy working with you.

To the unstoppable Liane-Louise Smith and Kathryn Williams for championing Broken Country around the globe—it has been quite something to watch the two of you at work! At the Blair Partnership I am also grateful to Jordan Lees, Alex Ford, and Rhian Parry for their continual guidance and support.

To my editors: Carina Guiterman at Simon & Schuster US and Jocasta Hamilton and Abi Scruby at John Murray in the United Kingdom for your forensic interrogation of the manuscript and making the process so enjoyable. Not to mention being quite the loveliest people in publishing.

The entire Broken Country team at Simon & Schuster, who have been such a joy to work with, and in particular Maggie Southard, Danielle Prielipp, Wendy Sheanin, Liv Stratman, and Anna Hauser. Thank you Natalia Olbinksi for the glorious cover.

I would like to thank the foreign editors who fell in love with Broken Country and wrote such beautiful letters to say so. The way you connected with the story means so much to me.

I am grateful to the farmers who allowed me to accompany them in their daily lives when I was researching Broken Country. Your passion and instinctive understanding of the land and its wildlife was the fuel I needed to write the novel.

Thanks to Al Sykes, Lisa and Frank Reeve, and Peter Shallcross. And, of course, Keith and Nina Maidment, who have been farming the fields surrounding our house for half a century.

To Graham Bartlett, former detective turned crime author, for fielding my endless questions on policing and criminal justice so graciously.

Broken Country has unexpectedly introduced me to some truly inspirational women. Elizabeth Gabler and Marisa Paiva at Sony 3000 Pictures, Reese Witherspoon, Sarah Harden, Lauren Neustadter, and Ashley Strumwasser at Hello Sunshine: Thank you for your warmth and your passion for Broken Country. And Josie Freedman at CAA—thank you for making a long-held dream come true!

I chose to publish Broken Country under the name Clare Leslie Hall to honor my late parents, Jean Leslie and William Hall. We did not have them for long enough but the mark they made on the lives of my sisters and me has been everlasting. To Jane and Anna, as always, for being my twin rocks.

To John for literally everything. Thank you for your unwavering belief and your big heart; I am so lucky to have you by my side.

And to Jake, Maya, and Felix, who have grown up to be everything I hoped you’d be and so much more. You make me very proud.

The last mention must go to Felix, my youngest. You inspired this novel with your devotion to your puppy, Magnus. It’s been a long time coming—you are almost an adult now—but I always wanted to write this story for you.





More in Fiction





Still Alice

Then She Was Gone





Who Do You Love

When Life Gives You Lululemons





The Storyteller

Beautiful Disaster





