Acknowledgments


An array of people deserve and have my appreciation for their aid at the outset in making Influence possible. Several of my academic colleagues read and provided perceptive comments on the entire manuscript in its initial draft form, greatly strengthening the subsequent versions. They are Gus Levine, Doug Kenrick, Art Beaman, and Mark Zanna. In addition, the first draft was read by a few family members and friends—Richard and Gloria Cialdini, Bobette Gorden, and Ted Hall—who offered not only much-needed emotional support but insightful substantive commentary as well.

A second, larger group provided helpful suggestions for selected chapters or groups of chapters: Todd Anderson, Sandy Braver, Catherine Chambers, Judi Cialdini, Nancy Eisenberg, Larry Ettkin, Joanne Gersten, Jeff Goldstein, Betsy Hans, Valerie Hans, Joe Hepworth, Holly Hunt, Ann Inskeep, Barry Leshowitz, Darwyn Linder, Debbie Littler, John Mowen, Igor Pavlov, Janis Posner, Trish Puryear, Marilyn Rall, John Reich, Peter Reingen, Diane Ruble, Phyllis Sensenig, Roman Sherman, and Henry Wellman.

Certain people were instrumental at the beginning stages. John Staley was the first publishing professional to recognize the project’s potential. Jim Sherman, Al Goethals, John Keating, Dan Wagner, Dalmas Taylor, Wendy Wood, and David Watson provided early, positive reviews that encouraged author and editors alike. I would like to thank the following users of the book for their feedback during a telephone survey: Emory Griffin, Wheaton College; Robert Levine, California State University, Fresno; Jeffrey Lewin, Georgia State University; David Miller, Daytona Beach Community College; Lois Mohr, Georgia State University; and Richard Rogers, Daytona Beach Community College. The past editions benefited substantially from the reviews of Assaad Azzi, Yale University; Robert M. Brady, University of Arkansas; Amy M. Buddie, Kennesaw State University; Brian M. Cohen, University of Texas at San Antonio; Christian B. Crandall, University of Florida; Maria Czyzewska, Texas State University; A. Celeste Farr, North Carolina State University; Arthur Frankel, Salve Regina University; Catherine Goodwin, University of Alaska; Robert G. Lowder, Bradley University; James W. Michael, Jr., Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University; Eugene P. Sheehan, University of Northern Colorado; Jefferson A. Singer, Connecticut College; Brian Smith, Graceland University; and Sandi W. Smith, Michigan State University.

As regards the present edition, several individuals deserve special thanks. My agent, Jim Levine, was a source of exquisite counsel. My editor at Harper Business, Hollis Heimbouch, and I were so much in accord on matters large and small that the writing/editorial process became more streamlined than I had ever experienced before. Also at Harper Business, Wendy Wong and copy editor Plaegian Alexander were terrific at getting my manuscript into shape for production. My colleague Steve J. Martin provided proprietary data from his brilliantly conducted experiments that enriched and enlivened my content. Because of the multinational reach of previous editions, I asked Anna Ropiecka to provide manuscript feedback from the perspective of a non-native English speaker, which she did with great insight and much benefit to the final product. Inside my team at Influence At Work, Eily Vandermeer and Cara Tracy were willing to stretch their responsibilities and, in the process, reveal invaluable new competencies. I would be remiss if I failed to acknowledge the ongoing support for Influence of Charlie Munger, who gave the book instant credibility among readers from the financial and investing communities.

Then there is Bobette Gorden—helpmate, workmate, playmate, and soulmate—whose gentle commentaries always improved the work and whose love made every day a joy.





