Praise for Influence, New and Expanded


“If you could read just one book on how to be more effective in business and life, I’d pick Influence. It’s a tour de force that Cialdini has somehow made more marvelous.”

—Katy Milkman, professor at the Wharton School, host of the Choiceology podcast, and author of How to Change

“A phenomenal book! Whether you seek to boost sales, strike a better deal, or improve your relationships, Influence offers scientifically tested principles that can change your life.”

—Daniel L. Shapiro, Ph.D., founder and director of the Harvard International Negotiation Program and author of Negotiating the Nonnegotiable

“Influence richly deserves its status as the definitive book on the subject. I learned so much from this revised edition, and so will you.”

—Tim Harford, author of The Data Detective (US)/How to Make the World Add Up (UK)

“Prepare to be dazzled. Bob Cialdini is the godfather of influence, and the original version of this book is already a classic. Whether you’re trying to influence or understand how others influence you, this book will show you how.”

—Jonah Berger, professor at the Wharton School and author of Contagious and The Catalyst

“A remarkable effort and achievement. Influence remains the brilliantly written treatise on fundamental principles of human behavior, with the addition of a timely new principle.”

—Jeffrey Pfeffer, Thomas D. Dee II Professor of Organizational Behavior at the Stanford Graduate School of Business and author of Power: Why Some People Have It—and Others Don’t

“Influence is a modern business classic that has profoundly shaped the fields of marketing and psychology. Robert Cialdini’s new edition makes a brilliant book even better, with robust new insights and examples.”

—Dorie Clark, author of Reinventing You and executive education faculty, Duke University Fuqua School of Business

“The new Influence is nothing short of a masterpiece. The writing is both timeless and worth reading immediately.”

—Joe Polish, founder of Genius Network

“Influence is a must-read for anyone who wants to understand the decision-making process. It is simply essential reading in the canon of psychology and behavioral finance.”

—Barry Ritholtz, chairman and chief investment officer of Ritholtz Wealth Management

“Cialdini has made a classic even better. This updated edition of Influence affirms its place as one of the most important books on business and behavior of the last fifty years. The new additions are terrific.”

—Daniel H. Pink, author of When, Drive, and To Sell Is Human

“Influence is the only book I’ve assigned to my organizational behavior students at Stanford for the last twenty-five years. Students love it, and, years later, rave about how helpful it is has been throughout their careers. The new version is even more useful and nuanced—and even more fun to read.”

—Robert I. Sutton, professor at the Stanford Graduate School of Business and author of seven books, including New York Times bestsellers The No Asshole Rule and Good Boss, Bad Boss

“Like every psychologist I know (and like many thousands of others who are curious about how the world works), I got my start learning about persuasion with Bob Cialdini’s Influence. This revised edition builds so meaningfully on the worn first edition sitting next to my desk—Influence will continue to clarify and inspire the art and science of persuasion for years to come.”

—Betsy Levy Paluck, professor of psychology and public affairs, deputy director of the Kahneman-Treisman Center for Behavioral Science and Public Policy, Princeton University





