Lust

Psychological adaptations point to a human evolutionary past of casual sex. Because the adaptive benefits of temporary liaisons differ for each gender, however, evolution has forged different psychological mechanisms for men and women. For ancestral men, the primary benefit of casual sex was a direct increase in the number of offspring. Men consequently faced a key adaptive problem—how to gain sexual access to a variety of women.

One psychological solution to the problem of securing sexual access to a variety of partners is old-fashioned lust. Men have evolved a powerful desire for sexual access to a variety of women. When President Jimmy Carter told a reporter that he “had lust in his heart,” he expressed honestly a universal male desire for sexual variety. Men do not always act on this desire, but it is a motivating force: “Even if only one impulse in a thousand is consummated, the function of lust nonetheless is to motivate sexual intercourse.”11

To find how many sexual partners people desire, the study of short-term and long-term mating asked unmarried college students to identify how many sex partners they would ideally like to have within various time periods, ranging from the next month to their entire lifetime.12 Men desired more sex partners than women at each of the different time intervals. Within the next year, for example, men stated on average that ideally they would like to have more than six sex partners, whereas women said that they would like to have only one. Within the next three years, men desired ten sex partners, whereas women wanted only two. In their lifetime, men on average wanted to have eighteen sex partners and women only four or five.

David Schmitt’s massive study of fifty-two different cultures located on six continents and thirteen islands uncovered the same pattern.13 Norwegian culture provides an especially interesting test case for these sex differences, since it is a culture with a high degree of gender equality.14 Over the next thirty years, Norwegian women desired roughly five sex partners; Norwegian men desired roughly twenty-five. Some psychologists argue that increased gender equality will reduce or eliminate these and other sex differences.15 This clearly has not happened in Norway or in any other culture studied so far. Men’s inclination to count their “conquests” and to “put notches on their belt,” long incorrectly attributed in Western culture to male immaturity or masculine insecurity, in fact reflects an adaptation to motivate brief sexual encounters.

Studies of sex drive reveal similar gender differences. The most massive study, involving more than 200,000 individuals from 53 countries, measured sex drive by asking participants to respond to statements such as “I have a strong sex drive” and “It doesn’t take much to get me sexually excited.”16 In every nation, from Thailand to Croatia to Trinidad, men reported having a higher sex drive than did women. Similarly, large gender differences emerge from studies of masturbation rates and pornography consumption. The sex differences in sex drive prove just as large in nations with high levels of gender equality, such as Sweden and Denmark, as they do in nations with lower levels of gender equality, such as Bangladesh, Egypt, and Nigeria—findings that contradict the notion that these sex differences are caused by economic gender inequality.

Another psychological solution to the problem of gaining sexual access to a variety of partners is to let little time elapse before seeking sexual intercourse. The less time he permits to elapse before obtaining sexual intercourse, the larger the number of women a man can successfully bed. Large time investments absorb more of a man’s mating effort and interfere with solving the problem of number and variety. In the business world, time is money. In the mating world, time is sexual opportunity.

Men and women in the study of short-term and long-term mating rated how likely they would be to consent to sex with someone they viewed as desirable if they had known the person for only an hour, a day, a week, a month, six months, a year, two years, or five years. Both men and women said that they would probably have sex upon knowing an attractive person for five years. At every shorter interval, however, men exceeded women in their reported likelihood of having sex. Five years or six months—it was all the same for men. They expressed equal eagerness for sex with women they had known for either length of time. In contrast, women dropped from probable consent to sex after five years’ acquaintance to neutral feelings about sex after knowing a person for six months.

Having known a potential mate for only one week, men are still on average positive about the possibility of consenting to sex. Women, in sharp contrast, report being unlikely to have sex after knowing someone for just a week. Upon knowing a potential mate for merely one hour, men are slightly disinclined to consider having sex, but the disinclination is not strong. For most women, sex after just one hour is a virtual impossibility. These fundamental sex differences have been extensively documented across the globe, including in Norway, Denmark, and Sweden.17 As with men’s desires, men’s inclination to let little time elapse before seeking sexual intercourse offers a partial solution to the adaptive problem of gaining sexual access to a variety of partners.

Studies of Internet dating point to the same conclusion. Barry Kuhle conducted a study of users of Tinder, a dating site geared heavily toward short-term mating.18 Even though it is widely seen as a site for sexual hookups, men more than women expressed significantly greater interest in immediate short-term sex. Men reported “swiping right” on dozens or even hundreds of female profiles in the hope that a few would reciprocate. Women were considerably more selective, picking just one or a few for potential matches. Male lust, seemingly insatiable, drives men’s search for sexual variety in the modern world of Internet mating.


