Intimate Partner Violence

Violence takes several forms. One is psychological abuse, which causes a wife to feel less valuable in the relationship, to lower her sense of desirability and make her feel lucky to have secured the husband, and to diminish her perceived prospects on the mating market if she is contemplating abandoning the mateship.31

Two functional tactics of psychological abuse are condescension and contempt. Condescension manifests through two methods. In one, a man places more value on his opinions simply because he is a man. In another, a man treats his mate as if she were stupid or inferior. Newlywed men condescend roughly twice as often as their wives do. These acts have the effect of lowering the wife’s sense of her own desirability.32 Condescension, one form of which is “mansplaining,” may function to increase the victim’s investment and commitment to the relationship and to bend the victim’s energies toward the goals of the abuser.33 Victims often feel that, because their mating alternatives are not rosy, they must strive valiantly to placate the current mate. They also appease the partner to avoid incurring his further wrath.

Psychological abuse sometimes escalates from verbal abuse to physical violence. Men’s motives for battering women center heavily on coercive control. One researcher attended the trials of 100 Canadian couples engaged in litigation over the husband’s violence toward the wife. The researcher concluded that at the core of nearly all the cases was the husband’s frustration about his inability to control his wife, whom he frequently accused of being a whore or of having sex with other men.34 A study of thirty-one battered American women found that jealousy was the main topic of spousal arguments. Jealousy led to physical abuse in 52 percent of the cases, with 94 percent listing jealousy as a frequent cause of the history of battering in the relationship.35 In yet another study, for 95 percent of sixty battered wives who had sought the assistance of a clinic in North Carolina, “morbid jealousy,” such as jealousy if the wife left the house for any reason or if she maintained friendships with other men or women, had evoked violent reactions from their husbands.36 The coercive constraint of women, particularly in sexual matters, underlies most cases of physical abuse.

Spouse abuse is obviously a dangerous game to play. The abuser may be seeking increased commitment and investment, but the tactic may backfire and produce a desire to leave instead. Alternatively, this form of abuse may represent a last-ditch attempt to hold on to a mate who is on the brink of leaving. In this sense, the abuser treads on thin ice. He risks triggering the decision that the relationship is too costly to endure. Perhaps this is why abusers are often profusely apologetic after the abuse, crying, pleading, and promising that they will never do it again.37

Partner abuse is not a Western invention; it occurs cross-culturally. Among the Yanomamö, for example, husbands regularly strike their wives with sticks for offenses as slight as serving tea too slowly.38 Interestingly, Yanomamö wives often regard physical abuse as a sign of the depth of their husband’s love for them—an interpretation probably not shared by their modern American counterparts. Whatever the interpretation, these beatings have the effect of subordinating Yanomamö women to their husbands.

Men sometimes abuse their partner by insulting her physical appearance. Although only 5 percent of newlywed men do so, the percentage triples by the fourth year of marriage. In marked contrast, only 1 percent of newlywed women insult their husband’s appearance, and only 5 percent of longer-married women do so. Given that a woman’s physical appearance is typically a key component of her mate value, women find these derogations especially distressing. Men may insult their appearance to lower women’s perception of their own desirability, thereby securing a more favorable power balance within the relationship.

As with other destructive tendencies, the fact that abuse has an adaptive logic behind it does not mean that people should accept it, desire it, or be lax about curtailing it. On the contrary, greater understanding of the logic behind abusive tactics and the contexts in which they occur should lead to more effective means of curtailing them. Men who have certain personality dispositions, such as being emotionally unstable, are four times as likely to abuse their wives as emotionally stable men.39 Discrepancies in the desirability of the two partners, a long distance between the couple’s residence and that of the woman’s kin, and the absence of legal penalties for abuse are contexts that put women at increased risk.


