The Coolidge Effect

The story is told that President Calvin Coolidge and his wife, Grace, were being given separate tours of newly formed government farms. Upon passing the chicken coops and noticing a rooster vigorously copulating with a hen, Mrs. Coolidge inquired about how often the rooster performed this duty. “Dozens of times each day,” replied the guide. Mrs. Coolidge asked the guide to “please mention this fact to the president.” When the president passed by later and was informed of the sexual vigor of the rooster, he asked, “Always with the same hen?” “Oh, no,” the guide replied, “a different one each time.” “Please tell that to Mrs. Coolidge,” said the president. And so the “Coolidge effect” was named—the male tendency to be sexually re-aroused upon the presentation of novel females, giving males an impulse to mate with multiple females.

The Coolidge effect is a widespread mammalian trait that has been documented many times.20 Male rats, rams, cattle, and sheep all show the effect. In a typical study, a cow is placed in a bull pen, and after copulation the cow is replaced with another cow. The bull’s sexual response continues unabated with each new cow but diminishes quickly when the same cow is left in the pen. Males continue to become aroused to the point of ejaculation in response to novel females. The response to the eighth, the tenth, or the twelfth female is nearly as strong as the response to the first.

Sexual arousal to novelty occurs despite a variety of attempts to diminish it. For example, when researchers disguised ewes postcopulation with a canvas covering, the rams were never fooled.21 Their response to a female with whom they had already copulated was always lower than with a novel female. The diminished drive was not a result of the female’s having had sex perse; the renewed drive occurred just as often if the novel female had already copulated with another male. And the male remained relatively uninterested if the original female was merely removed and reintroduced.

Men across cultures also show the Coolidge effect. In Western culture, the frequency of intercourse with a long-term partner declines as the relationship lengthens. Compared to the first month of marriage, intercourse is roughly half as frequent after one year of marriage, and it declines more gradually thereafter. As Donald Symons notes, “The waning of lust for one’s wife is adaptive . . . because it promotes a roving eye.”22 Human wanderlust takes many forms. Men in most cultures pursue extramarital sex more often than do their wives. The Kinsey study, for example, found that 50 percent of men but only 26 percent of women had extramarital affairs.23 Some studies show that the gap may be narrowing. One study of 8,000 married men and women found that 40 percent of the men and 36 percent of the women reported at least one affair. The Hite reports on sexuality suggest figures as high as 75 percent for men and 70 percent for women, although these samples are acknowledged not to be representative.24 More representative samples, such as Morton Hunt’s survey of 982 men and 1,044 women, yielded an incidence of 41 percent for men and 18 percent for women.25 Despite these varying estimates, and a possible narrowing of the gap between the sexes, all studies show sex differences in the incidence and frequency of affairs: more men have affairs more often, and with more partners, than women do.26

Spouse swapping, “swinging,” and polyamory are nearly always initiated by husbands, not by wives.27 A Muria man from India summarized the male desire for variety succinctly: “You don’t want to eat the same vegetable every day.”28 A Kgatla man from South Africa described his sexual desires about his two wives: “I find them both equally desirable, but when I have slept with one for three days, by the fourth day she has wearied me, and when I go to the other I find that I have greater passion, she seems more attractive than the first, but it is not really so, for when I return to the latter again there is the same renewed passion.”29

The anthropologist Thomas Gregor describes the sexual feelings of Amazonian Mehinaku men in this way: “Women’s sexual attractiveness varies from ‘flavorless’ (mana) to the ‘delicious’ (awirintya) . . . sad to say, sex with spouses is said to be mana, in contrast with sex with lovers, which is nearly always awirintyapa.”30 Gustav Flaubert writes of Madame Bovary that she is “like any other mistress; and the charm of novelty, gradually slipping away like a garment, laid bare the eternal monotony of passion, whose forms and phrases are forever the same.”31

Studies of men’s sexual arousal to pornography support the existence of the Coolidge effect in humans.32 Using physiological measures of penile tumescence and self-reports of sexual arousal, researchers have shown that men viewing the same erotic images repeatedly experience progressively diminished arousal with each viewing. Over the same time period, men exposed to erotic images of different women became consistently re-aroused. The modern explosion of Internet pornography, now a multibillion-dollar business, owes its success largely to hijacking men’s evolved sexual psychology.

Kinsey sums it up best: “There seems to be no question but that the human male would be promiscuous in his choice of sexual partners throughout the whole of his life if there were no social restrictions. . . . The human female is much less interested in a variety of partners.”33


