Chastity and Fidelity

Mammalian females typically enter estrus only at intervals. Vivid visual cues and strong scents often accompany estrus and powerfully attract males. Sexual intercourse occurs primarily in this narrow envelope of time. Women, however, do not send any sort of genital signal when they ovulate. Nor is there much evidence that women secrete detectable olfactory cues. Indeed, women are rare among primates in possessing the unusual adaptation of comparatively concealed or cryptic ovulation.52 Yes, there are some subtle changes—a slight lightening of the skin, a slightly more attractive voice pitch, and even a higher sexual drive. But relatively cryptic ovulation obscures a woman’s reproductive status.

Concealed ovulation dramatically changed the ground rules of human mating. Women became attractive to men not just when ovulating but throughout their menstrual cycles. Cryptic ovulation created a special adaptive problem for men by decreasing the certainty of their paternity. Consider a primate male who monopolizes a female for the brief period that she is in estrus. In contrast to human males, he can be fairly “certain” of his paternity, although obviously not consciously. The period during which he must guard the female and have sex with her is sharply constrained. Before and after her estrus, he can go about his other business without running the risk of cuckoldry.

Ancestral men did not have this luxury. Our human ancestors never knew when a woman was ovulating. Because mating is not the sole activity that humans require to survive and reproduce, women could not be guarded around the clock. And the more time a man spent guarding, the less time he had available for grappling with other critical adaptive challenges. Ancestral men therefore were faced with a unique paternity problem not faced by other primate males—how to be certain of their paternity when ovulation was concealed.

Marriage or long-term committed mating provided one solution.53 Men who married would benefit reproductively relative to other men by substantially increasing their probability of paternity. Repeated sexual intercourse with one woman throughout her ovulation cycle raised a man’s odds that she would bear his child. The social traditions of marriage function as public ties that bind a couple, with fidelity enforced by family members as well as by each partner. Marriage also provides men with opportunities to learn intimately about their mate’s personality and subtle patterns of behavior, making it difficult for her to hide signs of infidelity. These benefits of marriage would have outweighed the costs of forgoing the sexual opportunities sometimes available to ancestral bachelors, at least under some conditions.

For an ancestral man to reap the reproductive benefits of marriage, he had to seek reasonable assurances that his mate would indeed remain sexually faithful to him. Men who failed to be aware of these cues would have lost out in the currency of relative reproductive success. Failure to be sensitive to these cues so as to ensure their partner’s fidelity would have diverted years of her parental investment to another man’s children. Men who were indifferent to the potential sexual contact between their wives and other men would not have been successful in the game of differential reproductive success.

Our male forebears solved this uniquely male adaptive problem by seeking qualities in a potential mate that might increase the odds of securing their paternity. At least two preferences in a mate could solve the problem for males: the desire for premarital chastity and the quest for postmarital sexual loyalty. Before the use of modern contraceptives, chastity provided a cue to the future certainty of paternity. On the assumption that a woman’s proclivities toward chaste behavior would be stable over time, her premarital chastity signaled her likely future fidelity.

In the modern United States, men value virgin brides modestly more than women value virgin grooms. But the value they place on it has declined over the past seventy years, coinciding with the increasing availability of reliable birth control methods.54 In the 1930s, men viewed chastity as close to indispensable, but in the past few decades men have rated it as desirable but not crucial. Among the eighteen characteristics rated, chastity declined from the tenth most valued in 1939 to the seventeenth most valued in the late 1980s and 1990s and into the 2000s and 2010s. Furthermore, American men differ regionally in how they value chastity. College students in Texas, for example, desire a chaste mate more than college students in California, rating it a 1.13 as opposed to 0.73 on a 3.00 scale. Despite the decline in the value of virginity in the twentieth century and despite regional variations, the sex difference remains—men more than women emphasize chastity in a potential committed mateship.

The trend for men to value chastity more than women holds up worldwide, but cultures vary tremendously in the value placed on chastity. At one extreme, people in China, India, Indonesia, Iran, Taiwan, and the Palestinian areas of Israel attach a high value to chastity in a potential mate. At the opposite extreme, people in Sweden, Norway, Finland, the Netherlands, Germany, and France believe that virginity is largely irrelevant or unimportant in a potential mate.

In contrast to the worldwide consistency in the different preferences by gender for youth and physical attractiveness, only 62 percent of the cultures in the international study placed a significantly different value on chastity in a committed mateship by sex. Where sex differences in the value of virginity were found, however, men invariably placed a greater value on it than women did. In no culture did women desire chastity more than men did.

The cultural variability in the preference of each sex for chastity is explained by several factors, including the prevailing incidence of premarital sex, the degree to which chastity can be demanded in a mate, the economic independence of women, and the reliability with which chastity can be evaluated. Chastity differs from other attributes, such as a woman’s physical attractiveness, in that it is less directly observable. Even physical tests of female virginity are unreliable, whether from variations in the structure of the hymen, rupture due to nonsexual causes, or deliberate alteration.55

Variation in the value that people place on chastity may be traceable in part to variability in the economic independence of women and in women’s control of their own sexuality. In some cultures, such as Sweden, premarital sex is not discouraged and practically no one is a virgin at marriage. One reason may be that women in Sweden are far less economically reliant on men than women in most other cultures. The legal scholar Richard Posner notes that marriage provides few benefits for Swedish women relative to women in most other cultures.56 The Swedish social welfare system includes day care for children, long paid maternity leaves, and many other material benefits. The Swedish taxpayers effectively provide women with what partners otherwise would or might. Women’s economic independence from men lowers the cost to them of a free and active sex life before marriage, or as an alternative to marriage. Thus, practically no Swedish women are virgins at marriage, and hence the value that Swedish men place on chastity has declined to a worldwide low of 0.25.57

Differences in the economic independence of women, in the benefits provided by husbands, and in the intensity of competition for husbands all drive the critical cultural variation.58 Where women benefit from marriage and where competition for husbands is fierce, women compete to signal chastity, causing the average amount of premarital sex to go down. Where women control their economic fate, do not require so much of men’s investment, and need to compete less for reliable providers, they are freer to disregard men’s preferences, which causes the average amount of premarital sex to go up. Men everywhere might value chastity in a long-term mate if they could get it, but in many cultures they simply cannot demand it of their brides.

From a man’s reproductive perspective, a more important cue to the certainty of paternity than virginity per se is the assurance of future fidelity. If men cannot reasonably require virginity, they can choose mates for sexual loyalty or fidelity. In fact, the study of short-term and long-term mating found that American men viewed having little sexual experience as desirable in a spouse. Furthermore, men saw promiscuity as especially undesirable in a permanent mate, rating it –2.07 on a scale of –3.00 to +3.00. The actual amount of prior sexual activity in a potential mate, rather than virginity per se, would have provided an excellent guide for ancestral men who sought to solve the problem of uncertainty of paternity. Indeed, the single best predictor of extramarital sex is premarital sexual permissiveness—people who have many sex partners before marriage tend to be more unfaithful than those who have few sex partners before marriage.59

Modern men place a premium on fidelity. When American men in the study of short-term and long-term partners evaluated sixty-seven possible characteristics for their desirability in a committed mateship, faithfulness and sexual loyalty emerged as the most highly valued traits.60 All men give these traits the highest rating possible, an average of +2.85 on a scale of –3.00 to +3.00. Men regard unfaithfulness as the least desirable characteristic in a wife, rating it a –2.93, reflecting the high value that men place on fidelity. Men abhor promiscuity and infidelity in their wives. Unfaithfulness proves to be more upsetting to men than any other pain a spouse can inflict on her mate. Women also become extremely upset over an unfaithful mate, but several other factors, such as sexual aggressiveness, exceed infidelity in the grief they cause women.61

The sexual revolution of the 1960s and 1970s, with its promises of sexual freedom and lack of possessiveness, apparently has had a limited impact on men’s preferences for sexual fidelity. Nor has the overhyped hookup culture on college campuses today significantly changed these preferences. Cues to fidelity still signal that the woman is willing to channel all of her reproductive value exclusively to her husband. A woman’s future sexual conduct looms large in men’s commitment decisions. The fact that nonpaternity rates—that is, the prevalence of children in a marriage mistakenly believed to have been fathered by the husband—tend to be quite low in most cultures, many as low as 1 to 3 percent, suggests that most men who commit to marriage have largely succeeded in solving this key adaptive problem.62


