Mate Retention Through Fulfilling a Partner’s Desires

Once jealousy has become activated by threats to the security of one’s mateship, it can motivate tactics directed at the mate, at the rival, or at oneself. Men and women use an astonishing variety of tactics to keep a mate. A partner’s original mate preferences form the basis for one major strategy: fulfilling the partner’s preferences—that is, providing the sorts of resources he or she initially sought—should be a highly effective method of preserving the relationship.

To investigate this possibility, I initiated mate retention studies.38 First, I asked dating men and women to describe specific behaviors they had observed in people trying to hold on to partners to prevent them from becoming involved with someone else. They came up with 104 identifiable acts, which a team of four investigators classified into nineteen discrete clusters. The cluster called “vigilance,” for example, included calling a partner at unexpected times to see who he or she was with, having one’s friends check up on the partner, snooping through personal belongings, and dropping by unexpectedly to see what the partner was doing. Finally, I asked 102 college students who were involved in dating relationships and 210 newlyweds to rate how frequently they performed each of these acts of vigilance. In their fifth year of marriage, the newlywed couples again reported on their use of mate retention tactics. A separate panel of judges evaluated the tactics for their effectiveness in keeping a mate when performed by a man and when performed by a woman.

Fulfilling the initial mating desires of the partner did indeed prove to be an effective mate-keeping tactic. Because women desire love and kindness in their initial selection of a mate, continuing to provide love and kindness is a highly effective tactic for men who want to keep their mates. Men who tell their mates that they love them, are helpful when their mates need assistance, and regularly display kindness and affection succeed in retaining their mates. These were judged to be the most effective acts that men could perform, with an effectiveness rating of 6.23 on a 7-point scale, and were significantly more effective for men than the same acts performed by women, which received an effectiveness rating of 5.39. Furthermore, the performance of these acts was directly linked with the length of the relationship among dating couples and with the duration of marriage after five years. Husbands who failed to perform acts of love and commitment were more likely to have a wife who was contemplating or seeking divorce than husbands who were kind and loving. Acts of love and kindness succeed because they signal an emotional commitment to the relationship, they bestow a benefit rather than inflicting a cost, and they fulfill women’s psychological preferences for a desirable partner.

Because women also value economic and material resources, continuing to provide them is another highly effective tactic for men to keep their mates. In the service of this goal, men reported spending a lot of money on their mates and buying them expensive gifts. Among committed dating couples, men provided these external resources more often than women did. Providing resources was the second most effective tactic for men in retaining a mate, with an average effectiveness rating of 4.50, in contrast to a rating of 3.76 when used by women. Men more than women provided resources in the service of keeping their mates during the newlywed phase of marriage, and they continued to use this tactic more often than their wives after five years of marriage.39 Like successful tactics for attracting a mate, successful tactics for keeping a mate fulfill the mate’s desires—in this case, providing the economic and material resources on which women place a premium.

Analogously, men value physical attractiveness, and I found that women were most likely to cite enhancing their appearance as one of their primary mate retention tactics—a finding that is replicable across cultures, including Brazil, Croatia, and the United States.40 Out of the nineteen clusters evaluated, enhancing their appearance was the second most effective tactic used by women, after love and kindness. Women go out of their way to make themselves attractive to their partners, making up their faces to look nice, dressing to maintain a partner’s interest, and acting sexy to distract a partner’s attention from other women. Not only newlywed women but also women married for five years enhance their physical appearance in the service of keeping a mate, which shows that, for women, continuing to fulfill men’s initial mating desires is a key to staying together.

The importance of appearance was dramatically illustrated by a study in which men and women watched a videotape of a couple sitting on a couch talking.41 After forty-five seconds, during which the couple cuddle, kiss, and touch one another, one of the partners gets up and leaves the room to refill their wineglasses. Seconds later, an interloper enters and is introduced as the previous girlfriend or boyfriend of the partner who has remained on the couch. (The men watched the version with a previous boyfriend as the interloper, and the women watched the version with an old girlfriend as the interloper.) The partner stands up and briefly hugs the interloper, then the two sit down on the couch. Over the next minute they perform intimate actions, such as kissing and touching. The absent partner then returns, stops, and looks down at the two people who are showing affection to each other on the couch. The tape ends there. Women who saw the tape were nearly twice as likely as men to report that, in response to this threat to keeping a mate, they would try to make themselves more attractive to their partner. Men, in contrast, were more likely to say that they would become angry, suggesting a more aggressive strategy for keeping a mate. Women enhance their appearance because it activates men’s evolved desires.


