Deception

Conflicts between the sexes over sexual access, emotional commitment, and investment of resources reach more dramatic proportions when we add deception to the mix. Deception flourishes in the plant and animal world. Some orchids, for example, have brilliantly colored petals and centers that mimic the colors, shapes, and scents of female wasps of the species Scolia ciliata.25 Male wasps, powerfully attracted by these scents and colors, land on the orchids the way they would land on a female’s back. This event is followed by a pseudo-copulation, in which the male moves rapidly over the rigid hairs of the upper surface of the flower, which mimic the hairs on a female wasp’s abdomen. He probes the orchid in an apparent search for complementary female genital structures, incidentally picking up the plant’s pollen. Failing to find the exact structures needed for ejaculation, however, the male moves on to another pseudo-female. Orchids deceive the male wasp for the function of cross-pollination.

Humans also engage in sexual deception. A colleague used to go to upscale hotel bars and pick up men who would take her out to dinner. During dinner, she was friendly, flirtatious, sexy, and engaging. Toward the end of dinner, she would excuse herself to go to the women’s room, then slip out the back door and disappear into the night. Sometimes she did this alone, sometimes with a girlfriend. Her targets were often businessmen from out of town, whom she would be unlikely to encounter again. Although she spoke no lies, she was a sexual deceiver. She used sexual cues to elicit resources and then left sneakily without following through with sex. One can’t feel too sorry for the guys, though, since many were married and pursuing their own forms of deception.

Although this tactic may be unusual, its underlying theme occurs repeatedly in ordinary behavior in various guises. Women are apparently aware of the sexual effects they have on men. When 104 college women were asked how often they flirted with a man to get something they wanted, such as a favor or special treatment, knowing that they did not want to have sex with him, they gave this action on average a frequency of 3 on a 4-point scale, where 3 signified “sometimes” and 4 signified “often.” The comparable figure for men was 2. Women gave similar responses to questions about using sexual hints to gain favors and attention, yet admitted that they had no intention of having sex with the targets of these hints.26 Some women acknowledge being sexual deceivers as one tactic in their strategic arsenal.

Although women are more likely to be sexual deceivers, men are more likely to be commitment deceivers. Consider what a thirty-three-year-old man had to say about the commitment implied by declarations of love:

You would think saying “I love you” to a woman to thrill and entice her isn’t necessary anymore. But that’s not so. These three words have a toniclike effect. I blurt out a declaration of love whenever I’m in the heat of passion. I’m not always believed, but it adds to the occasion for both of us. It’s not exactly a deception on my part, I have to feel something for her. And, what the hell, it usually seems like the right thing to say at the time.27

When my lab asked 112 college men whether they had ever exaggerated the depth of their feelings for a woman in order to have sex with her, 71 percent admitted to having done so, compared with only 39 percent of the women who were asked a parallel question. When the women were asked whether a man had ever deceived them by his exaggeration of the depth of his feelings in order to have sex with her, 97 percent admitted that they had experienced this tactic at the hands of men; in contrast, only 59 percent of the men had experienced this tactic at the hands of women.28

Among married couples, deception continues in the form of sexual infidelity. The motivations for male infidelity are clear, since ancestral men who had extramarital affairs might sire additional children and thereby gain a reproductive advantage over their more loyal rivals. Women get extremely upset by male infidelity because it signals that the man is diverting resources to other women and might even defect from their relationship. Women stand to lose the entire investment secured through the marriage, and replacing a husband is not always easy, especially if a woman has children. Consequently, evolutionists have predicted that women will be far more upset by an affair that contains emotional involvement than about one that does not, because emotional involvement typically signals outright defection rather than the less costly siphoning off of a fraction of resources. Women turn out to be more forgiving and less upset if no emotional involvement accompanies their husband’s fling.29 Men seem to know this. When caught having an affair, men often plead that the other woman “means nothing.”

In the human mating dance, the costs of being deceived about a potential mate’s resources and commitment are carried more heavily by women. An ancestral man who made a poor choice in sex partners risked losing only a small portion of time, energy, and resources, although he may also have evoked the rage of a jealous boyfriend or protective father. An ancestral woman who made a poor choice of a casual mate, allowing herself to be deceived about the man’s long-term intentions, risked enduring pregnancy, childbirth, and child care unaided and being less able to attract an alternative mate, since existing children are seen as costs by potential mates on the mating market.

Because the deceived can suffer large losses, selection favored the evolution of psychological vigilance to detect cues to deception and to prevent its occurrence. Humans today are experiencing one more cycle in the endless spiral of an evolutionary arms race between deception by one gender and detection by the other. As the deceptive tactics get more subtle, the ability to detect deception becomes more sensitive.

Women guard against deception. When they are seeking a committed relationship, an important first-line defense is imposing courtship costs by requiring extended time, energy, and costly signals before consenting to sex. More time buys more assessment. It allows a woman greater opportunity to evaluate a man, to assess how committed he is to her, and to detect whether he is burdened by prior commitments to other women and children. Men who seek to deceive women about their ultimate intentions typically tire of extended courtship. They go elsewhere for sex partners who are more readily available.

Although women have developed strategies for penetrating men’s deception, men clearly cannot ignore deception at the hands of women. This is especially true when men seek spouses. Accurate assessments of women’s reproductive value, resources, alliances, and fidelity become paramount. This is vividly illustrated in a scene from Tennessee Williams’s play A Streetcar Named Desire. Mitch is on a date with Blanche DuBois, a former high school teacher to whom he is engaged to be married but who has deceived him about her sexual past with other men, including a sexual relationship with a student that caused her expulsion from the school. A friend has just alerted Mitch to Blanche’s past, so he aggressively tells her that he has always seen her only at night under a dim light, never in a well-lit room. He turns on a bright light, from which Blanche recoils, but he sees that she is older than she had led him to believe. He confronts her with what he has heard about her flamboyant sexual past. She plaintively asks Mitch whether he will still marry her. He says, “No, I don’t think I’ll marry you now,” as he nevertheless approaches her menacingly for sex.30

Given the importance that men attach to looks and sexual exclusivity in a potential mate, they are especially sensitive to deception about a woman’s age and sexual history. Men are keenly attuned to information about women’s sexual reputations. Vigilance guards them against deception about two of the most reproductively important considerations for a man seeking a long-term mate—her reproductive value and the likelihood that her value will be channeled exclusively to him.

Unfortunately, conflict between the sexes does not end with battles about sexual access, commitment, or deception. Sometimes it takes more violent forms.


