Standards for Short-Term Mates

Another psychological solution to securing a variety of casual sex partners is men’s relaxation of their standards for acceptable partners. High standards for attributes such as age, intelligence, personality, and marital status function to exclude the majority of potential mates from consideration. Relaxed standards ensure the presence of more eligible players.

College students provided information about the minimum and maximum acceptable ages of a partner for a short-term or long-term sexual relationship. For a brief hookup, college men accepted an age range that was roughly four years wider than women did. Men were willing to have sex in the short run with members of the opposite sex who were as young as sixteen and as old as twenty-eight, whereas women required men to be at least eighteen but no older than twenty-six. This relaxation of age restrictions by men did not apply to committed mating, for which the minimum age was seventeen and the maximum twenty-two. For women the minimum age for committed mating was nineteen and the maximum twenty-five.

Men also relaxed their standards for a wide variety of other characteristics. Out of the sixty-seven characteristics nominated as potentially desirable in a casual mate, men required lower levels of such assets as charm, athleticism, education, generosity, honesty, independence, kindness, intellectuality, loyalty, sense of humor, sociability, wealth, responsibility, spontaneity, cooperativeness, and emotional stability. Men’s relaxation of standards helps to solve the problem of gaining access to a variety of sex partners.

When the college students rated sixty-one undesirable characteristics, women rated roughly one-third of them as more undesirable than men did in the context of casual sex. In this context, men had less objection to drawbacks such as mental abuse, violence, bisexuality, dislike by others, excessive drinking, ignorance, lack of education, possessiveness, promiscuity, selfishness, lack of humor, and lack of sensuality. In contrast, men rated only four negative characteristics as significantly more undesirable than women did: a low sex drive, physical unattractiveness, a need for commitment, and hairiness. Men clearly relaxed their standards more than women did for brief sexual encounters.

Lowered standards, however, are still standards. Indeed, men’s standards for sexual affairs reveal a precise strategy to gain sexual variety. Compared with their long-term preferences, men seeking casual sex disliked women who were prudish or conservative or had a low sex drive. In contrast to their long-term preferences, men valued sexual experience in a potential temporary sex partner, which reflects a belief that sexually experienced women are more sexually accessible to them than women who are sexually inexperienced. Men disliked promiscuity or indiscriminate sexuality in a potential wife or committed mate but believed that promiscuity was either neutral or even mildly desirable in a potential sex partner. Promiscuity, high sex drive, and sexual experience in a woman probably signal an increased likelihood that a man can gain sexual access for the short run. Prudishness and low sex drive, in contrast, signal a difficulty in gaining sexual access and thus interfere with men’s short-term sexual strategy.

One distinguishing feature of men’s relaxation of standards for short-term sex partners involves the need for commitment. In contrast to the tremendous positive value of +2.17 out of 3.00 that men placed on commitment when seeking a marriage partner, men seeking a casual hookup disliked a quest for commitment in a woman, judging it – 1.40, or undesirable, in a short-term partner.19 Furthermore, men were not particularly bothered by a woman’s marital status when they evaluated casual sex partners; a woman’s commitment to another man reduced the odds that she would try to extract a commitment from them. These findings confirm that men shift their desires to minimize their investment in a casual mating, providing an additional clue to an evolutionary history in which men sometimes sought casual, uncommitted sex.


