Diversity in Mating Strategies

Differences in the desires of men and women represent an important part of the diversity within the human species, but there is tremendous variability within each sex as well. Although more men than women are inclined to pursue purely casual sexual relationships, some men remain exclusively monogamous for life and some women find polyamory, casual sex, or a mixed mating strategy preferable to monogamy. Some men seek women for their economic resources, and some women seek men for their looks, despite average trends to the contrary. Although most men and most women are sexually attracted to the other gender, some are attracted to members of their own gender, some to both, and some to neither. These differences within each gender cannot be dismissed as statistical flukes. They are crucial to understanding the rich repertoire of human mating strategies.

Sexual diversity hinges on the individual circumstances that favor each person’s choice of one strategy over another within their repertoire—a choice that may not be consciously articulated. For example, Aka men favor a mating strategy of high parental investment when they lack economic resources.15 !Kung women favor serial mating in circumstances in which they are sufficiently desirable to continue attracting men who are willing to invest.16 Our mate value—how desirable we are in the mating market—influences the degree to which we can translate our desires into actual mating outcomes. No mating strategies, however deeply rooted in our evolved psychology, are invariably expressed regardless of social context or regardless of mate value. Knowledge of the contexts that facilitate and impede each sexual strategy aids our understanding of the diversity of mating behaviors within and between the genders.

Knowledge of this diversity leads one to scrutinize certain value judgments for the selfish interests that may be driving them. In Western society, lifelong monogamy is often held up to be the ideal. Anyone who does not conform to this practice is regarded as deviant, immature, sinful, or a failure. Such a judgment may turn out to be a manifestation of the underlying sexual strategies of the person who upholds it. It is often in the best interests of a woman, for example, to convince others of the ideal of lifelong love. Women pursuing a short-term mating strategy pose a threat to monogamous women, siphoning off the resources, attention, and commitment of their long-term mates. It is often in the best interests of a man to convince others to adopt a monogamous strategy, even if he fails to follow it himself. Promiscuous men usurp single men’s mating opportunities and threaten to poach already mated women. Our sexual morality, in short, is a key component of our evolved mating strategies.

The short-term sexual strategies of both genders originate deep in human evolutionary history. Evolutionary accounts that emphasize the sexually indiscriminate man and the sexually coy woman grossly overstate the case. Just as men have the capacity for commitment as part of their strategic repertoire, women have the capacity for casual sex within theirs, and they in fact pursue it when they perceive that it is to their advantage to do so.

For a century after Darwin proposed the theory of sexual selection, it was vigorously resisted by male scientists, in part because they presumed that women were passive in the mating process. The proposal that women actively select their mates and that these selections constitute a powerful evolutionary force was thought to be science fiction rather than scientific fact. In the 1970s, scientists gradually came to accept the profound importance of female choice in the animal and insect world, and in the 1980s and 1990s scientists began to document within our own species the active strategies that women pursue in choosing and competing for mates. But in the early decades of the twenty-first century, some stubborn holdouts continue to insist that women have but a single mating strategy—the pursuit of a long-term mate.

Scientific evidence suggests otherwise. The fact that women who are engaged in casual sex as opposed to committed mating shift their mating desires to favor a man’s extravagant lifestyle, his physical attractiveness, his masculine body, and even his risk-taking, cocky “bad-boy” qualities tells us that women have specific psychological mechanisms designed for short-term mating. The fact that women who have extramarital affairs often choose men who are higher in status than their husbands and tend to fall in love with their affair partners reveals that women have adaptations for mate switching. The fact that women shift to brief liaisons under predictable circumstances, such as a scarcity of men capable of investing in them or an unfavorable ratio of women to men, tells us that women have specific adaptations designed for shifting from long-term to short-term mating strategies.

People often condemn as immoral the frequent switching of mates and other sexually uninhibited activities. And it often serves their interests to promulgate this view of morality to others. Our sexual morality stems from our evolved sexual strategies. From a scientific point of view, however, there is no moral justification for placing a premium on a single strategy within the collective human repertoire. Our human nature is found in the entire repertoire of our sexual strategies. Recognition of the rich diversity of desires takes us one step closer to harmony.


