Have Men Evolved Adaptations to Rape?

Controversy about the possibility that men have evolved adaptations to rape erupted in the year 2000 when the biologist Randy Thornhill and the anthropologist Craig Palmer published a book called A Natural History of Rape: Biological Bases of Sexual Coercion.58 Although evolutionary theories of human rape had been published for two decades preceding its publication, their book proved to be a flash point. The authors outline two competing theories of rape, one endorsed by each author. Thornhill proposes the theory that men have evolved rape adaptations—specialized psychological mechanisms for forcing sex on unwilling women as a reproductive strategy. Palmer proposes instead that rape is a by-product of other evolved mechanisms, such as the male desire for sexual variety, a desire for low-cost consensual sex, a psychological sensitivity to sexual opportunities, and the general capacity of men to use physical aggression to achieve a wide variety of goals.

The rape-as-adaptation theory proposes six specialized adaptations that may have evolved in the male mind:

•Assessment of the vulnerability of potential rape victims (for example, in the context of warfare or a non-warfare situation in which a woman lacks the protection of a husband or kin)

•A context-sensitive switch that motivates rape by men who lack sexual access to consenting partners (such as low-status males who cannot obtain mates through regular channels of courtship)

•A preference for maximally fertile rape victims

•An increase in sperm counts of rape ejaculates compared with those occurring in consensual sex

•Male sexual arousal specifically to the use of force or to signs of female resistance to consensual sex

•Context-specific marital rape when sperm competition might exist, such as when there is evidence or suspicion of female infidelity

Evidence supporting these hypothesized adaptations is either absent or ambiguous. Rape is common in war, clearly a context where women are often vulnerable, but so is theft, looting, and property damage. Are there specialized adaptations for all these behaviors, or are they instead either by-products of other psychological mechanisms or merely the output of more general cost-benefit evaluation mechanisms? Decisive studies have not yet been conducted.

Although there is no conclusive evidence supporting the rape-as-adaptation theory, psychological and physiological experiments have revealed some disturbing findings. Laboratory studies that expose men to audio and visual depictions of rape versus mutually consenting sexual encounters find that men display sexual arousal, assessed both by self-report and by penile tumescence, to both consenting and nonconsenting situations. Men apparently are sexually aroused when exposed to sexual scenes, whether or not consent is involved. Nonetheless, other conditions, such as the presence of violence, evidence that the victim experiences pain, and a disgust reaction from the victim, inhibit the sexual arousal of most men.59

These findings cannot differentiate between the two explanatory alternatives: that men have only a general tendency to be sexually aroused in response to witnessing sexual encounters and hence have no distinct adaptations to forced sex, or that men have evolved a distinct rape psychology. Consider a food analogy. Humans, like dogs, salivate when they smell appetizing food, especially if they have not eaten for a while. Suppose that a scientist hypothesizes that humans have a specific adaptation to take food forcibly from others. The scientist then conducts studies in which people are deprived of food for twenty-four hours and thereafter exposed visually to one of two scenes: appetizing food that is given willingly by one person to another person, or equally appetizing food that is forcibly taken from one person by another.60 If this hypothetical experiment finds that people salivate an equal volume to both food scenes, we cannot conclude that people have a distinct food adaptation to “take food forcibly.” All we can conclude is that, when hungry, people seem to salivate when exposed to scenes of food, regardless of the circumstances surrounding the method of procurement. This hypothetical example is analogous to the findings that indicate sexual arousal in men in response to sexual scenes, regardless of whether those scenes depict mutually consenting sex or forced sex. The data do not constitute evidence that rape is a distinct evolved strategy of men.

Another possible piece of evidence for rape adaptation theory is that convicted rapists come disproportionately from lower socioeconomic groups, supporting the mate deprivation hypothesis.61 Some interviews with rapists support this view. One serial rapist, for example, reported that “I felt that my social station would make her reject me. And I didn’t feel that I would be able to make this person. I didn’t know how to go about meeting her. . . . I took advantage of her fright and raped her.”62 For men who lack the status, money, or other resources to attract women, coercion may represent a desperate alternative. Men scorned by women because they lack the qualities for attracting desirable mates may develop hostility toward women, an attitude that short-circuits the normal empathic response and so promotes coercive sexual behavior.

But this finding could also be caused by lower rates of reporting when rape is committed by men from higher social groups, or from the greater ability of privileged men to evade arrest and conviction because they can afford to hire expensive lawyers. Or perhaps women raped by high-status men are less likely to press charges, given the lower odds of being believed and obtaining justice.

There is also direct evidence against the mate deprivation hypothesis of rape. In a study of 156 heterosexual men, average age of twenty, the evolutionary psychologist Martin Lalumiere and his colleagues measured the use of sexual coercion with items such as: “Have you ever had sexual intercourse with a woman even though she didn’t really want to because you used some degree of physical force?”63 Separately, they measured mating success. Men who scored high on mating success also scored high on sexual aggression. Men who had had a lot of sexual partners were more likely to report using force. Furthermore, men who evaluated their future earning potential as high reported using more, not less, physical coercion in their mating tactics. Although additional studies are needed, we can tentatively conclude that a simple version of the mate deprivation theory of rape is unlikely to be correct.

These results, however, do not rule out a more complex hypothesis—perhaps men have evolved two kinds of context-specific rape adaptations, one contingent on when they experience mating failure and one when the costs are so low that they can get away with it, as might occur among the upper socioeconomic stratum of society.64 There is no current evidence for or against this modified hypothesis.

Rape victims tend to be disproportionately concentrated among young, reproductive-age women. Despite the fact that some women of all ages are raped, the victims of rape are heavily concentrated among young women. In one study of 10,315 rape victims, women between the ages of sixteen and thirty-five were far more likely to be raped than women in any other age category.65 Eighty-five percent of all rape victims are less than thirty-six years old. By way of comparison, victims of other crimes, such as aggravated assault and murder, show a markedly different age distribution. Women between forty and forty-nine, for example, are just as likely to suffer an aggravated assault as women between twenty and twenty-nine, but the older women are far less likely to be raped. Indeed, the age distribution of rape victims corresponds quite closely to the age distribution of women’s reproductive value, in marked contrast to the age distribution of victims of other violent crimes. This evidence strongly suggests that rape is not independent of men’s broader evolved sexual psychology.

That rapists disproportionately victimize young fertile women, however, is not decisive evidence for or against the competing theories of rape. This finding can be attributed to men’s evolved attraction to cues to fertile women in regular mating contexts rather than a rape-specific adaptation. That is, although there is abundant evidence that men are attracted to young fertile women across mating contexts, there is no evidence that this attraction is a rape-specific adaptation.

One source of evidence that many scientists believe to be relevant to theories of rape is the pregnancy rate that follows from rape. If rape evolved as a reproductive strategy, it must historically have resulted in reproduction some of the time. Modern rape-pregnancy rates, of course, are not necessarily relevant to whether rape resulted in pregnancy in the past; modern routine contraceptives may reduce current rape-pregnancy rates below those that occurred in ancestral times. Thus, it is all the more startling that one study discovered that pregnancy rates resulting from penile-vaginal rape among reproductive-age women are extraordinarily high—6.42 percent—compared to a consensual per-incident rate of only 3.1 percent.66 This finding can be partially explained by selection bias in the victims whom rapists target—young fertile women. Nonetheless, even controlling for age, the study’s authors find a rape-pregnancy rate that is roughly 2 percent higher than the consensual-sex pregnancy rate. This counterintuitive finding, if it turns out to be replicable, cries out for some kind of explanation.

Jonathan and Tiffani Gottschall offer a hypothesis anchored in the premise that men who court women using normal mating strategies are “at the mercy of discriminating females,” whereas rapists are not. Rapists, although constrained by opportunity and the defense mechanisms of women, nonetheless can and do choose victims who would otherwise refuse to mate with them. Rapists might choose women who, in addition to being young, are especially physically attractive. Since attractive women are more fertile on average (see Chapter 3), this may partially explain the unusually high rape-pregnancy rate.

The rape-pregnancy findings, however, do not directly support the rape-as-adaptation hypothesis. We already know that men are attracted to features that correlate with fertility, such as cues to youth and health, in consensual mating contexts, and so no specialized rape adaptation is required to explain these results. The rape-pregnancy findings do, however, contradict the so-called argument from inconceivable conception, according to which some opponents of the rape-as-adaptation theory claim that rape cannot possibly have evolved because it so rarely leads to conception.67

Individual men differ in their proclivity toward rape. In one study, men were asked to imagine that they had the possibility of forcing sex on someone else against her will with no chance of getting caught, no chance that anyone would find out, no risk of disease, and no possibility of damage to their reputation. Thirty-five percent indicated that there was some likelihood they would force sex on the woman under these conditions, although in most cases the likelihood was slight.68 In another study that used a similar method, 27 percent of the men indicated that there was some likelihood they would force sex on a woman if there was no chance of getting caught.69 Although these percentages are alarmingly high, if taken at face value they also indicate that most men are not potential rapists.

Men who do use coercion to get sex exhibit a distinct set of characteristics. They tend to be hostile toward women, to endorse the myth that women secretly want to be raped, and to show a personality profile marked by impulsiveness, hostility, low agreeableness, low empathy, and hypermasculinity, combined with a high degree of sexual promiscuity.70

Marital rapes are more likely when the husband is concerned about a potential sexual infidelity, as well as during or immediately following a breakup.71 This finding suggests the possibility of rape as a sperm competition adaptation. Nonetheless, the direction of causality is unclear—perhaps women are more likely to break up with partners who tend to force them into unwanted sex. In short, a conclusion reached by Donald Symons in 1979 appears to be apt today: “I do not believe that available data are even close to sufficient to warrant the conclusion that rape itself is a facultative adaptation in the human male.”72

I speculate that scientific progress will advance when theorists distinguish different types of rape, rather than viewing sexual assault as a singular crime. Consider date rape, stranger rape, warfare rape, rape by husbands, homosexual rape, and rape of stepdaughters by stepfathers. The causes of one type of rape may differ substantially from the causes of others. Date rape, for example, may be partly a by-product of the modern conditions of living, where young women live in social circumstances devoid of the close protection of extended kin—a known deterrent to violence against women. Serial stranger rapists often manage to avoid detection owing to the unusual modern conditions of high geographic mobility and anonymous urban living. The limited geographical mobility and small-group living of our ancestors would have rendered certain kinds of stranger rape virtually impossible. Rape in the context of warfare, in contrast, appears to have a cross-cultural prevalence and historical depth that may have favored selection for rape. Some kinds of rape may be caused by pathology or dysfunction of evolved mechanisms; others may be by-products; still others may be caused by specific rape adaptations. Lumping all instances of forced sex under a single label “rape” may impede progress in discovering the unique underlying causal conditions that lead to each distinct type of crime.


