A Mating Crisis—Especially for Educated Women

The earlier death of men is one critical factor among several that produces a serious imbalance between the number of men relative to the number of women on the mating market—a disparity that gets more severe with time. This phenomenon is sometimes referred to as “the marriage squeeze,” although it occurs whether or not people seek marriage per se. Many factors affect the relative numbers. Rates of infant, childhood, adolescent, and adult mortality differ, with males dying at a faster rate throughout the life span. Men emigrate more often than women, leaving behind a sexual imbalance. Baby booms also cause imbalances because women typically select men older than they are and there are fewer men for the many women born during the boom to choose from the smaller cohort born before the baby boom. From men’s perspective, those born prior to the baby boom have a relatively large pool of women to select from, since they tend to choose younger women who were born during the boom period. Far more men than women are imprisoned, creating even more imbalance in the ratio between the sexes on the mating market. And wars end men’s lives far more often than women’s lives, creating a surplus of women on subsequent mating markets.

Divorce and remarriage patterns over the life span are other key causes of the marriage squeeze. Men who divorce tend to remarry women who are increasingly younger than they are. A 2013 study, for example, found that among first-time married men, only 10 percent married women ten or more years younger than they were and 5 percent married women who were six to nine years younger.56 Upon remarriage, these figures jumped to 20 percent and 18 percent, so that fully 38 percent of remarried men had brides six or more years younger. It may be a cliché that men marry women increasingly younger as they age and remarry, but in this case the stereotype is verified by the statistics.

These remarriage patterns are not quirks of North American countries but rather emerge in every country for which there is adequate information. In one study of forty-seven countries, age affected women’s chances of remarriage more than men’s.57 For the ages of twenty-five to twenty-nine, the differences in remarriage by sex were slight, because young women maintain high desirability at those ages as potential mates. By the ages of fifty to fifty-four, however, the sexes diverge dramatically in their remarriage rates. In that age bracket in Egypt, for example, four times as many men as women remarry; in Ecuador, nine times as many men as women remarry; and in Tunisia, nineteen times as many men as women remarry.

The mating crisis is especially pronounced among educated women. Every year more women than men become college-educated. The disparity is already prevalent across North America and Europe, and the trend is beginning to spread across the world more widely. At the University of Texas at Austin where I teach, the 2016 student body consisted of 54 percent women to 46 percent men. This imbalance may not seem large at first blush. But if you do the math correctly, it translates into a hefty 17 percent more women than men in the local mating pool. A key cause of the broader mating crisis for educated women is that women seek certain qualities in committed mateships. Most women are unwilling to settle for men who are less educated, less intelligent, and less professionally successful than they are. Men are less exacting on precisely these dimensions, choosing to prioritize, for better or worse, other evolved criteria such as youth and appearance. So the initial sex ratio imbalance within the college-educated group gets worse for high-achieving women. They end up being forced to compete for the limited pool of educated men not just with their more numerous educated rivals, but also with less educated women who men find desirable on other dimensions. The good news is that educated women and men who choose each other tend to have happier, more stable, and more affluent marriages.

The sex ratio imbalance as women age is largely an outcome of the sexual psychology of men and women. At the heart of this squeeze is the decline in female reproductive value with age, which caused selection to favor ancestral men who preferred younger women as mates and to favor ancestral women who preferred somewhat older men with status and resources as mates. In the modern environment, intelligence and education predict upward mobility. Young, healthy, and attractive women act on their desires for somewhat older, high-prestige mates, attracting men who might otherwise become mates for older women. Men with status and relative wealth try to fulfill their preferences for youthful, healthy, attractive women. And because ancestral women’s preferences for men with resources created a selection pressure for greater male competitiveness and risk taking, men die at a faster rate than women, exacerbating the shortage of men.

Changes in the proportion of men to women throughout life cause predictable changes in their sexual strategies. The degree of selectivity is the first strategy to shift. When there is a surplus of men, fewer men can be highly choosy, and they must settle for a less desirable mate than they would otherwise attract if the sexes were more in balance. A low sex ratio, in contrast, restricts women’s selectivity, because there are fewer men from whom to choose. These ratios affect the degree to which both sexes can translate their ideal preferences into actual mateships.

Low proportions of men also cause a destabilization of marriage. A surplus of women makes many of them unable to secure strong commitments. Men with many available women can pursue casual sexual liaisons with aplomb. The current rise of the hookup culture on college campuses can be traced, in part, to the surplus of women. Changes in the ratios of men to women within the United States throughout history support this explanation, because periods of increasing divorce, as between 1970 and 1980, correspond closely to periods when there was a surplus of women on the mating market.58

In the late 1980s, in contrast, divorce rates for new marriages were lower than in the previous decade, coinciding with an increase in the sex ratio.59 At that time American women’s marital happiness was also higher than their husbands’, whereas it had fallen below their husbands’ marital happiness during the preceding fifteen years, when there was a shortage of men.60 The number of men pursuing business careers doubled between 1973 and the late 1980s, coinciding with the shift from a low to a high ratio of males and suggesting that men were becoming more concerned with their economic success. Men’s willingness to invest directly in care for their children can also be expected to increase at such times, though no evidence yet exists on this point. Men may strive to become kinder and gentler to fulfill women’s mating preferences when there are relatively few available women.

A shortage of available men also causes women to take greater responsibility for providing resources. One reason is that women are not able to count on provisioning from men. Furthermore, increasing economic assets may represent a woman’s strategy to increase her desirability, analogous to the dowry competition in traditional societies. Throughout history, female participation in paid employment has increased during periods of low ratios of men to women. During the 1920s, foreign-born women in the United States outnumbered foreign-born men because of restrictive immigration laws; the participation of these women in the labor force abruptly rose.61 The existence of fewer investing men causes women to take greater responsibility for securing their own resources.

Women in mating markets of few men also intensify their competition with each other by enhancing their appearance, increasing their health-promoting behavior, and even offering sexual resources to attract men. In the sexual revolution in the United States in the late 1960s and the 1970s, for example, many women abandoned their sexual reserve and engaged in sexual relationships without requiring serious male commitment. This shift in sexual mores coincided with a period of low numbers of optimally older men for women of the baby boom. Increased competition among females with regard to their appearance, as shown by such trends as the rise of the diet industries, the mushrooming of the women’s makeup and make-over industries, and the increase in cosmetic plastic surgery—including tummy tucks, liposuction, breast implants, and facelifts—also occurred in this time of a shortage of men.

When there are more men competing for fewer women, the balance of power shifts to women. Women can more easily command what they want from men, and men in turn become more competitive with one another to attract and retain desirable women. Marriages and other long-term committed relationships are more stable, because men are more willing to offer commitment and are less willing to leave. Men have fewer available alternatives and cannot easily pursue casual sexual goals when women are scarce. Men therefore increasingly compete to fulfill women’s preferences for a long-term mate, especially by striving for position and showing a willingness to invest parentally.

Not all changes that occur during periods of high ratios of men, however, benefit women. An important drawback is the potential at these times for increasing violence toward women. During periods of male surplus, great numbers of men are excluded from mating because there are not enough women to go around. Furthermore, men who can attract women under these conditions jealously guard them against rivals. Married women in turn have more alternatives, and so the threat of their leaving gains greater credibility. This circumstance may evoke sexual jealousy in husbands, promoting threats and violence to control wives and increased violence against men who threaten to lure a mate away.62

The existence of large numbers of men who are unable to attract a mate may also increase sexual aggression and rape. Violence often becomes the strategy of people who lack resources that would otherwise elicit voluntary compliance with their wishes.63 Rape is sometimes perpetrated by marginal men who lack the status and resources that women seek in long-term mates.64 Furthermore, the likelihood of war is apparently higher in societies with a high ratio of males than in societies with a low ratio of males, supporting the theory that competition among males intensifies at times of a surplus of males.65

Changes in the ratio of men to women throughout life cause corresponding shifts in mating strategies. Adolescent men often live in a world where available women are in scarce supply, because women prefer mature men with position and affluence. Young men’s strategies reflect these local conditions of female scarcity, because they engage in highly risky competition strategies, committing the vast majority of violent crimes of sexual coercion, robbery, battery, and murder.66 In one study, for example, 71 percent of the men arrested for rape were between the ages of fifteen and twenty-nine.67 These are crimes of coercion against women whom men cannot attract or control through positive incentives.

As men mature into their thirties and forties, the ratio between the sexes typically tilts in their favor, if they have survived the risks and attained positions of reasonable status. They have a wider pool of potential women to choose from, and they enjoy a higher value on the mating market than they did in their youth. They are better able to attract multiple mates, whether through casual sex, extramarital sex, serial marriage, or polygyny. Men of any age who have little desirability as mates, however, do not enjoy this advantage, and some men are shut out of mating entirely. Women experience an increasingly skewed sex ratio as they age and are more often forced to compromise their mating strategies by lowering their standards, increasing their level of intrasexual competition, securing more resources on their own, or sometimes just opting out of the mating market. These changes over time are all products of our evolved mating strategies.


