Cognitive Biases in Sexual Mind Reading

Humans live in an uncertain mating world. We must make inferences about others’ intentions and emotional states. How attracted is he to her? How committed is she to him? Does that smile signal sexual interest or mere friendliness? Some psychological states, such as smoldering passion for another person, are intentionally concealed, rendering uncertainty greater and speculation more tortuous. We are forced to make inferences about hidden intentions and concealed deeds using a collage of cues that are only probabilistically related to their actual existence. An unexplained scent on one’s romantic partner, for example, could signal sexual betrayal, or it could be an innocuous aroma acquired during a casual conversation or a walk through a shopping mall.

In reading the minds of others, there are two ways to go wrong. You can infer a psychological state that is not there, as when one assumes sexual interest when it is absent. Or you can fail to infer a psychological state that is there, as when one remains oblivious to another’s burning yearnings, sexual or romantic. According to error management theory (EMT), it would be exceedingly unlikely that the cost-benefit consequences of the two types of errors would be identical across their many occurrences.3 We intuitively understand this in the context of smoke alarms, which are typically set to be hypersensitive to any hint of smoke. The costs of occasional false alarms are minor compared to the catastrophic costs of failing to detect a real house fire. EMT extends this logic to cost-benefit consequences in the metric of evolutionary fitness.

According to EMT, asymmetries in the cost-benefit consequences of mind-reading inferences, if they recur over evolutionary time, create selection pressures that produce predictable cognitive biases. Just as smoke alarms are biased to produce more false positives than false negatives, EMT predicts that evolved mind-reading mechanisms will be biased to produce more of one type of inferential error than another. The sexual overperception bias, whereby men possess mind-reading biases designed to minimize the costs of missed sexual opportunities, is a perfect example. EMT provides a cogent explanation for the finding that men appear to falsely infer that women are sexually interested in them when they merely smile, incidentally touch their arm, or are simply friendly.

In one study, 98 men and 102 women watched a ten-minute videotape of a conversation between a male professor and a female student.4 The student visits the professor’s office to ask for a deadline extension for a term paper. The actors in the film are a female drama student and a male drama professor. Neither actor acts flirtatious or provocative, although both have been instructed to behave in a friendly manner. Participants witnessed the tape and then rated the likely intentions of the woman using 7-point scales. Women watching the interaction were more likely to say that the student was trying to be friendly (6.45), not sexy (2.00) or seductive (1.89). Men, while also perceiving friendliness (6.09), were more likely than women to infer seductive (3.38) and sexual (3.84) intentions. Similar results were obtained from a study using photos of a man and women studying together.5 Men rated the photographed women as showing moderate intent to be sexy (4.87) and seductive (4.08), whereas women rating the identical photographs saw considerably less sexual intent (3.11) and less seductive intent (2.61).

Interestingly, men who view themselves as especially high in mate value are especially prone to experience the sexual overperception bias.6 Men who are dispositionally inclined to pursue a short-term mating strategy also exhibit a more pronounced sexual overperception bias—a bias that would facilitate the success of a short-term mating strategy by minimizing lost opportunities.7 A speed-dating study conducted in my lab, led by Carin Perilloux, found that men were especially susceptible to the sexual overperception bias when interacting with physically attractive women—an ironic finding since attractive women are generally very choosy.8 The men were inferring interest in the minds of the women least likely to actually be interested. Nevertheless, as men act on their inferences they do occasionally open up sexual opportunities. If over evolutionary history even a tiny fraction of these sexual misperceptions led to sex, then men would have evolved lower thresholds for inferring women’s sexual or romantic interest. Men’s sexual overperception bias evolved to motivate approach.

Once this male mechanism was in place, it became susceptible to manipulation. Women sometimes use their sexuality as a tactic in such manipulation. In one study of 200 university students, women significantly more than men reported smiling and flirting as a means of eliciting special treatment from members of the opposite sex, even though they had no interest in having sex with those men.9 Women, in short, sometimes exploit men’s sexual overperception bias for their own ends.10 Men’s perception of sexual interest in women combines with women’s intentional exploitation of this psychological adaptation to create a potentially volatile mix. These sexual strategies lead to conflict over the desired level of sexual intimacy, over men’s feeling that women lead them on, and over women’s feeling that men are too pushy in the sexual sphere.

Sexual pushiness sometimes slips over the line into sexual aggressiveness—the vigorous pursuit of sexual access despite a woman’s reluctance or resistance. Sexual aggressiveness is one strategy men use to minimize the costs they incur for sexual access, although this strategy carries its own costs in the possibility of retaliation and damage to their reputation. Acts of sexual aggression include demanding or forcing sexual intimacy, failing to get mutual agreement for sex, and touching a woman’s body without her permission. In one study, my lab asked women to evaluate 147 potentially upsetting actions that a man could perform. Women rated sexual aggression on average to be 6.50, or close to the 7.00 maximum of distress. No other kinds of acts that men could perform, including verbal abuse and nonsexual physical abuse, were judged by women to be as upsetting as sexual aggression. Contrary to a view held by some men, women do not want forced sex. Women sometimes have fantasies that involve forced sex with a man who turns out to be rich and handsome, and sometimes the theme of forced sex occurs in romance novels, but neither of these circumstances means that women actually desire forced or nonconsensual sex.11

Men, in sharp contrast, seem considerably less bothered if a woman is sexually aggressive; they see it as relatively innocuous compared with other sources of discomfort. On the same 7-point scale, for example, men judged the group of sexually aggressive acts to be only 3.02, or only lightly upsetting, when performed by a woman. A few men spontaneously commented that they would find such acts sexually arousing if a woman performed them. Other sources of distress, such as a mate’s infidelity and verbal or physical abuse, were seen by men as far more upsetting—6.04 and 5.55, respectively—than sexual aggression by a woman.

A disturbing difference between the genders is that men consistently underestimate how unacceptable sexual aggression is to women. When asked to judge its negative impact on women, men rated it only 5.80 on the 7-point scale, which is significantly lower than women’s own rating of 6.50. The implication of this alarming source of conflict between the sexes is that some men may be inclined to use aggressive sexual acts because they fail to comprehend how distressing these acts really are to women. In addition to creating conflict, men’s failure to correctly understand the psychological pain that women experience from sexual aggression may be one cause of men’s lack of empathy for rape victims.12 The callous remark by a Texas politician that if a woman cannot escape a rape, she should just lie back and enjoy it, could only have been uttered by someone who fails to understand the magnitude of the trauma experienced by women who are victims of sexual aggression.

Women, in contrast, overestimated how upsetting sexual aggression by a woman is to a man, judging it to be 5.13, or moderately upsetting, in contrast to men’s rating of only 3.02.13 Men and women both err in cross-sex mind-reading. These cognitive biases may result from false beliefs about the other gender, mistakenly extrapolating from their own projected reactions. Men seem to think that women are more like them than they really are, and women seem to think that men are more like them than they really are. Acquiring knowledge about gender differences in perceptions of sexual aggression might be one step toward reducing sexual conflict.

The flip side of the coin of sexual aggression is sexual withholding. Men consistently complain about women’s sexual withholding, defined by such acts as sexual teasing, saying no to having sex, and leading a man on and then turning him away. On the same 7-point scale of magnitude of upset, men judged sexual withholding to be 5.03, whereas women judged it to be 4.29. Both genders are bothered by sexual withholding, but men significantly more so than women.

For women, sexual withholding fulfills several possible functions. One is to preserve their ability to choose men of high mate value—those who are willing to commit emotionally, to invest materially, or to contribute high-quality genes, or ideally all three. Women withhold sex from certain men and selectively allocate it to others of their own choosing. Moreover, by withholding sex, women increase its value and render it a scarce resource. Scarcity ratchets up the price that men are willing to pay for it. If the only way men can gain sexual access is by heavy investment, then they will make that investment. Under conditions of sexual scarcity, men who fail to invest fail to mate. This creates another conflict between a man and a woman, since her withholding interferes with his strategy of gaining sex sooner and with fewer emotional strings attached.

Another function of sexual withholding is to manipulate a man’s perception of a woman’s value as a mate. Because highly desirable women are less sexually accessible to the average man by definition, a woman may influence a man’s perception of her desirability by withholding sexual access. Highly desirable women are, in fact, hard to get, so men interpret the difficulty of gaining sexual access to a woman as a cue to her mate value. Finally, sexual withholding, at least initially, may encourage a man to evaluate a woman as a long-term mate rather than a sexual fling. Granting sexual access early often causes a man to see a woman as a casual mate.

By withholding sex, women create challenges for men. They circumvent the component of men’s mating strategy that involves seeking low-cost sex. Certainly, women have a right to choose when, where, and with whom they want to have sex. But the exercise of that choice interferes with one of men’s deep-seated sexual strategies and is therefore experienced by men as bothersome or upsetting; hence, it is one of the key sources of conflict between the sexes.


