Standards of Physical Beauty

A preference for youth is merely the most obvious of men’s preferences linked to a woman’s reproductive capacity. Evolutionary logic leads to an even more powerful set of expectations for universal standards of beauty. Just as our standards for attractive landscapes embody cues such as water, game, and refuge, mimicking environments beneficial to our ancestors, so our standards for female beauty embody cues to women’s reproductive capacity.14 Beauty may be in the eyes of the beholder, but those eyes, and the minds behind the eyes, have been shaped by millions of years of human evolution.

Our ancestors had access to two types of observable evidence of a woman’s health and youth: features of physical appearance, such as full lips, clear skin, smooth skin, clear eyes, lustrous hair, and good muscle tone, and features of behavior, such as a bouncy, youthful gait, an animated facial expression, and a high energy level. These physical cues to youth and health, and hence to reproductive capacity, constitute key elements of male standards of female beauty.

Because physical and behavioral cues provide the most powerful observable evidence of a woman’s reproductive value, ancestral men evolved a preference for women who displayed these cues. Men who failed to prefer qualities that signaled high reproductive value—men who preferred to marry gray-haired grandmothers lacking in smooth skin and firm muscle tone—would have left fewer offspring.

Clelland Ford and Frank Beach discovered several universal cues that correspond precisely with this evolutionary theory of beauty.15 Signs of youth, such as clear skin and smooth skin, and signs of health, such as the absence of sores and lesions, are universally regarded as attractive. Any cues to ill health or older age are seen as less attractive. Imagining passionately kissing a lover’s acne is more likely to provoke feelings of disgust than feelings of sexual desire. Poor complexion is always considered a sexual turnoff. Pimples, ringworm, facial disfigurement, and dirtiness are universally seen as unattractive. Clarity and smoothness of skin and freedom from disease are universally attractive.

For example, the anthropologist Bronislaw Malinowski reported that, among the Trobriand Islanders in northwestern Melanesia, “sores, ulcers, and skin eruptions are naturally held to be specially repulsive from the viewpoint of erotic contact.” The “essential conditions” for beauty, in contrast, were “health, strong growth of hair, sound teeth, and smooth skin.”16 Specific features, such as bright eyes and full, well-shaped lips rather than thin or pinched lips, were especially important to the Islanders.

Cues to youth are also paramount in the aesthetics of women’s attractiveness. When men and women rate a series of photographs of women differing in age, judgments of facial attractiveness decline with the increasing age of the woman.17 The ratings of women’s beauty decline regardless of the age or sex of the judge.

Most traditional psychological theories of attraction have assumed that standards of attractiveness are learned gradually through cultural transmission and therefore do not emerge clearly until a child is at least three or four years old. The psychologist Judith Langlois and her colleagues have overturned this conventional wisdom by studying infants’ social responses to faces.18 Adults evaluated color slides of white and black female faces for their attractiveness. Then infants of two to three months of age and six to eight months of age were shown pairs of these faces that differed in their degree of attractiveness to adults. Both younger and older infants looked longer at the more attractive faces, suggesting that standards of beauty apparently emerge quite early in life. In a second study, Langlois found that twelve-month-old infants showed more observable pleasure, more play involvement, less distress, and less withdrawal when interacting with strangers who wore attractive masks than when interacting with strangers who wore unattractive masks.19 In a third study, Langlois found that twelve-month-old infants played significantly longer with attractive dolls than with unattractive dolls. No training seems necessary for these standards to emerge. This evidence challenges the common view that the idea of attractiveness is learned through gradual exposure to current cultural standards.

Many, but not all, constituents of beauty are neither arbitrary nor culturally capricious. When the psychologist Michael Cunningham asked people of different races to judge the facial attractiveness of photographs of women of various races, he found great consensus about who was and was not good-looking.20 Asian and American men, for example, agree with each other on which Asian and American women are most and least attractive. Consensus has also been found among Chinese, Indian, and English samples, between South Africans and Americans, and between black and white Americans.21

Photographic manipulation provides evidence supporting evolutionary theories of female beauty. To find out what makes for an attractive face, Langlois and her team generated composites of the human face by means of computer graphics technology. These faces were then superimposed upon each other to create new faces. The new composite faces were made up of a differing number of individual faces—four, eight, sixteen, or thirty-two. People then rated the attractiveness of each composite face, as well as the attractiveness of each individual face that made up the composite. Results proved startling. The composite faces were uniformly judged to be more physically attractive than any of the individual ones. The sixteen-face composite was deemed more attractive than the four-face or eight-face composites, and the thirty-two-face composite was deemed the most attractive of all. Because superimposing individual faces tends to eliminate their irregularities and make them more symmetrical, the average or symmetrical composite faces were more attractive than actual individual faces.22

One explanation for why symmetrical faces are considered more attractive comes from research conducted by the psychologist Steve Gangestad and the biologist Randy Thornhill, who examined the relationship between facial and bodily asymmetries and judgments of attractiveness.23 Repeated environmentally induced injuries and diseases produce asymmetries during development. These include not just injuries and other physical insults, which may provide a cue to health, but also the parasites that inhabit the human body and the mutations that inhabit the human genome. Because parasites and genetic mutations cause physical asymmetries, the degree of asymmetry can be used as a cue to the health status of the individual and as an index of the degree to which the individual’s development has been perturbed by various stressors. In scorpionflies and swallows, for example, males prefer to mate with symmetrical females and tend to avoid those that show asymmetries. In humans as well, when Gangestad and Thornhill measured people’s features, such as foot breadth, hand breadth, ear length, and ear breadth, and independently had these people evaluated on attractiveness, they found that less symmetrical people were seen as less attractive. Human asymmetries also increase with age. Older people’s faces are far more asymmetrical than younger people’s faces, so that symmetry provides another cue to youth as well. This evidence provides yet another confirmation of the theory that cues to health and cues to youth are embodied in standards of attractiveness—standards that emerge remarkably early in life.


