Implications for a Lasting Relationship

The major causes of marital dissolution worldwide are those that historically caused damage to reproductive success by imposing reproductive costs and interfering with preferred mating strategies. The most damaging events and changes are infidelity, which can reduce a husband’s confidence in paternity and deprive a wife of some or all of the husband’s resources; infertility, which renders a couple childless; sexual withdrawal, which deprives a husband of access to a wife’s reproductive value or signals to a wife that he is channeling his resources elsewhere; a man’s failure to provide economic support, which deprives a woman of the reproductively relevant resources inherent in her initial choice of a mate; a man’s acquisition of additional wives, which diverts resources from a particular spouse; and cruelty and meanness, which involve abuse, defection, affairs, and an unwillingness to continue a cooperative alliance.

The implications of these fundamental trends in human mating psychology for a lasting relationship are profound. To maximize the chances of preserving a long-term bond, couples would do well to remain faithful; produce children together; secure ample economic resources; act kind, generous, and understanding; and attend to their mate’s sexual and emotional desires. These actions do not guarantee a successful relationship, but they increase the odds substantially.

Unfortunately, not all damaging events and changes can be prevented. Environments impose hostile forces that no one can control, such as infertility, old age, decreased sexual desire, disease, status loss, social ostracism, and death. These forces can crush a mate’s value irrevocably, despite the best intentions. Alternative potential mates sometimes offer to provide what is lacking, so evolution has shaped psychological mechanisms that dispose people to leave their mates under these circumstances—mate-switching adaptations.49

Adaptations that function to attend to the shifting circumstances of mating cannot be easily turned off. In ancestral times, it frequently paid reproductive dividends in the event of the loss of a mate to be prepared by maintaining alternative prospects and to trade up when possible. Those who were caught unprepared, who failed to play in the field of possibilities, or who were unwilling to leave a reproductively damaging mate were less likely to produce descendants. Because the costs incurred and the benefits bestowed by a current mate must always be evaluated relative to those available from alternative mates, the psychological mechanisms of mate switching inevitably include comparisons. Unfortunately for lifelong happiness, a current mate sometimes falls short and fails to measure up to attractive available alternatives.

Most of these hostile forces are still with us today. A mate’s status can rise or fall, infertility traumatizes otherwise joyful couples, infidelities mount, and the sadness of aging turns the youthful frustration of unrequited love into the despair of unobtainable love. These events activate adaptations that evolved to deal with breakups, causing people to avoid threats to their reproduction. These mechanisms cannot be easily turned off. They cause people to seek new mates and sometimes to break up repeatedly as adaptively significant events emerge over the lifetime.





