Circumstances Favorable for Casual Sex

Everyone knows some men who are womanizers and others who are exclusively monogamous. Everyone knows some women who enjoy casual sex and others who would not dream of sex without commitment. Individuals differ in their proclivities for casual mating. Individuals also shift their proclivities at different times and in different contexts. These variations in sexual strategy depend on a range of personal, social, cultural, and ecological conditions.

The absence of an investing father during childhood has been reliably linked to the pursuit of a short-term sexual strategy. Among the Mayan of Belize and the Ache of Paraguay, for example, father absence has been correlated with men stating that they are unwilling to commit the time, energy, and resources needed to sustain a long-term mateship.78 Women and men who grow up in father-absent homes are likely to reach puberty sooner, to start having intercourse earlier, and to pursue a short-term strategy after their sexual debut.79 Their father’s absence may lead women to infer that men are not reliable investors and thus to pursue a short-term sexual strategy of obtaining some benefits from multiple men rather than trying to secure the sustained investment of one man.

There is some scientific controversy over the direction of effects and precisely what causes individual differences in sexual strategy. Is the shift to a short-term strategy when one’s father is absent due to the harsher or more unpredictable environment resulting from the father’s lack of investment? Or is it due to genes that father-absent dads pass on to their children? Yet another possibility is that stepfather presence, rather than father absence, prompts kids to spring into sexual action sooner. Moreover, biological fathers engage in heavier “daughter guarding,” which prevents girls from acting on their sexual impulses and encourages a long-term mating strategy. Future research is required to sort out these causal alternatives, but it is clear that individuals differ markedly in their inclination for short-term sex.

Casual sex is also related to people’s developmental stage in life. Adolescents in many cultures are more likely to use temporary mating as a means of assessing their value on the mating market, experimenting with different strategies, honing their attraction skills, and clarifying their own preferences. After they have done so, they are often ready for commitment or marriage. The fact that premarital adolescent sexual experimentation is tolerated and even encouraged in some cultures, such as the Mehinaku of Amazonia, provides a clue that short-term mating is related to one’s stage in life.80

The transitions between committed matings offer additional opportunities for casual sex. Upon divorce, for example, it is crucial to reassess one’s value on the current mating market. The presence of children from the marriage generally lowers the desirability of divorced people. The elevated status that comes with being more advanced in their career, conversely, may raise their desirability. Precisely how all these changed circumstances affect a particular person may be evaluated by brief encounters, which allow a person to gauge more precisely his or her desirability on the mating market.

The abundance or shortage of eligible men relative to eligible women is another critical context for temporary mating. Many factors affect this sex ratio, including wars, which kill larger numbers of men than women; risky activities such as fights, which more frequently affect men; intentional homicides, in which roughly seven times more men than women die; and differential remarriage rates by age, whereby women remarry less and less often than men with increasing age. The modern phenomenon of more women than men enrolling in many colleges and universities in North America and western Europe creates a sex ratio imbalance among the college-educated mating pool. At the University of Texas at Austin, for example, the student body in 2016 was 54 percent women and 46 percent men. This may not sound like a huge disparity, but in fact it translates into a surplus of 17 percent more women than men. China’s historical one-child policy, in contrast, created a surplus of men because parents selectively aborted female fetuses.

Men shift to short-term sexual strategies when many women are sexually available because the sex ratio is in their favor and they are better able to implement their desire for variety. Among the Ache, for example, men are highly promiscuous because there are 50 percent more women than men. Women shift to casual sex when there is a shortage of investing men available for marriage or when there are few benefits to marriage.81 In some subcultures, notably in areas of concentrated poverty, men often lack the resources that women desire in a permanent mate. Where men do not have resources, women have less reason to mate with only one man. Similarly, when women receive more resources from their kin than from their husbands, they are more likely to engage in extramarital sex.82 Women in these contexts sometimes mate opportunistically with different men, securing greater benefits for themselves and their children. The rise of the hookup culture on many modern college campuses has been partly created by the increasing sex ratio imbalance as higher percentages of women compared to men seek higher education.

In cultures where food is shared communally, women have less incentive to marry and often shift to temporary sex partners. The Ache of Paraguay, for example, communally share food secured from large game hunting. Good hunters do not get a larger share of meat than poor hunters. Women receive the same allotment of food, regardless of whether they have a husband and regardless of the hunting skill of their husband. Hence, there is less incentive for Ache women to remain mated with one man, and about 75 percent of them favor short-term relationships.83 The socialist welfare system of Sweden provides another example. Since food and other material resources are provided to everyone, women have less incentive to marry. As a result, only half of all Swedish couples who live together get married, and members of both sexes often pursue more casual relationships.84

Another factor that is likely to foster brief sexual encounters—although differently for men and women—is one’s future desirability as a mate. A man at the apprenticeship stage of a promising career may pursue only brief affairs, figuring that he will be able to attract a more desirable long-term mate later on, when his career is closer to its peak. A woman whose current desirability is low may reason that she cannot attract a husband of the quality she desires and so may pursue carefree short-term relationships as an alternative to settling for someone who does not meet her standards.

Certain legal, social, and cultural sanctions encourage short-term mating. Roman kings, for example, were permitted to take hundreds of concubines, and like Moroccan emperor Moulay Ismail the Bloodthirsty (see Chapter 3), they cycled the young women out of the harem by the time they reached the age of thirty.85 In Spain and France, it is an accepted cultural tradition that men who can afford it keep mistresses in apartments, a short-term arrangement outside the bounds and bonds of marriage. The ideologies of some isolated groups and communes—a living arrangement that was especially popular during the late 1960s and early 1970s and is present today among those practicing polyamory—encourage sexual experimentation with short-term relationships.

The sexual strategies pursued by other people affect the likelihood of casual sex. When many men pursue short-term relationships, as in Russia in many large-population cities, women are effectively forced into casual mating because fewer men are willing to commit, although some women choose to opt out of the mating game entirely. Or when one spouse has an extramarital affair, then the other may be motivated to even the score. Casual sex is never pursued in a vacuum. It is influenced by stage of life, mate value, sex ratios, cultural traditions, legal sanctions, and the strategies pursued by others. All of these circumstances affect the likelihood that a person will choose casual sex from the menu of human mating strategies.


