Differences Between the Sexes

Insight into the relations between men and women must penetrate the riddle of gender similarities and differences. Because women and men alike have faced many similar adaptive challenges over evolutionary history, all humans share many psychological solutions. Both sexes sweat and shiver to regulate body temperature. Both sexes place a tremendous value on intelligence and dependability in a lifetime mate. Both seek long-term mates who are cooperative, trustworthy, and loyal. And both desire mates who will not inflict crushing costs on them. We are all of one species from the same planet. Recognition of our shared psychology and shared biology is one step toward producing harmony between the sexes.

Against the backdrop of these shared adaptations, gender differences stand out in stark relief and demand explanation. Men and women differ in their psychology of mating solely and specifically in the domains where they have faced recurrently different adaptive problems over the long course of evolutionary history. Because ancestral women bore the lion’s share of responsibility for nourishing their infants, women rather than men have lactating breasts. Because fertilization occurs internally within women, ancestral men confronted the problem of uncertainty over their fatherhood. As a consequence, men have evolved particular mate preferences for sexual loyalty, a psychology of jealousy centered on sexual infidelity, and a proclivity to withdraw commitment when cuckolded, all of which differ in design from the mating psychology of women.1

Some of these gender differences may be unpleasant. Many women dislike being treated as sex objects or valued for qualities largely beyond their control, such as youth and beauty, although some exploit these desires for their own ends. Many men dislike being treated as success objects or valued for the size of their investment portfolio and the importance of their status in a competitive world, although they too sometimes exploit these desires for their own ends. It is painful to be the wife of a man whose desire for sexual variety leads him to sexual infidelity. It is painful to be the husband of a woman whose desire for emotional closeness leads her to seek intimacy in the arms of another man. For both genders it is distressing to be regarded as undesirable merely because one does not possess qualities that the other prefers in a mate.

To assume that men and women are psychologically the same, as was generally done in traditional social science and still is in some out-of-date scientific circles, goes against what we now know about our evolved sexual psychology. Given the power of sexual selection, under which each sex competes for access to desirable mates, it would defy scientific logic to find that men and women were psychologically identical in aspects of mating about which they have faced different adaptive challenges for millions of years. At this point in history, we can no longer doubt that men and women differ in their preferences for a mate: primarily for youth and physical attractiveness in one case, and for status, maturity, success, protection, and economic resources in the other. Men and women also differ in their proclivities for casual sex without emotional involvement, in their desire for sexual variety, and in the nature of their sexual fantasies.

Internet dating sites reveal modern expressions of our evolved sexual psychology. Tinder is deluged with more men than women who want casual sex. AshleyMadison.com appeals mostly to married men who seek sexual variety. SeekingArrangement.com caters to men with status and resources and women with youth and beauty who want to parlay their respective assets.

Men and women face different forms of interference with their preferred sexual strategies and so differ in the kinds of events that trigger powerful emotions such as anger and jealousy. Men and women differ in their tactics to attract mates, to keep mates, to eject mates, and to replace mates. These differences are universal features of our evolved strategies. They govern social interactions and fundamental relationships between individual women and men.

Some people complain about these differences, or deny that they exist despite the scientific evidence, or wish that they would cease to exist. But wishes and denials will not make psychological gender differences disappear, any more than they will make men’s beard growth or women’s breast development disappear. Harmony between men and women will be approached only when these denials are swept away and we squarely confront the differing desires and strategies of each.


