The Prospects for Lifetime Mating

Human mating changes over a lifetime, from the internal stirrings of puberty through the final bequest of inheritance to a surviving spouse. Both sexes have evolved psychological mechanisms designed to solve the problems posed by change over time—adaptations sensitive to shifts in reproductive value, status and resources, sex ratio, and mating opportunities. The changes affect women and men differently, and some of these changes are unpleasant. Women begin puberty two years earlier than men, but their capacity for reproduction stops two or three decades before men’s. The urgency that some childless women feel as their remaining years of potential reproduction wane—the increasingly loud ticking of the biological clock—is not caused by an arbitrary custom dictated by a particular culture, but rather reflects a psychological adaptation attuned to a reproductive reality.

A woman’s reproductive value over time affects not only her own sexual strategies but those of the men in her social environment, including her regular mate and other potential mates. When women are young, their partners guard them intensely, clinging tightly to the valuable reproductive resource they have successfully secured. The intense guarding closes off a woman’s opportunities for affairs and women see it as a sign of a man’s commitment or insecurity depending on circumstances. The sex lives of many couples are initially electrifying, made more so by the presence of interested rivals. With each passing year, however, the frequency of intercourse declines as women’s reproductive value declines. Episodes of intense jealousy gradually wane. Men become increasingly dissatisfied, and they show less affection to their wives. Women dislike this diminished attention from their mates and become increasingly irritated and upset about being neglected. Simultaneously, men express mounting distress about the demands of their mates for time and attention.

As women get older, men loosen the grip of guarding, and a higher and higher proportion of women pursue extramarital affairs, reaching a maximum as women approach the end of their reproductive years. Whereas for men affairs are often motivated by the desire for sexual variety, for women affairs are motivated more by emotional goals and may represent an effort to switch mates while they are still reproductively vibrant. Women seem to know that their desirability on the mating market will be higher if they leave their husbands sooner rather than later. After menopause, women shift their effort toward parenting and grandparenting, aiding the survival and reproduction of their descendants rather than continuing to reproduce directly. Women pay for their reproductive strategy of early and rapid reproduction in the currency of a shorter period of fertility.

Changes in men over a lifetime, like those of male chimpanzees, are more variable in the currencies of mating success. Men who increase their status and prestige remain highly desirable over the years. Men who fail to accrue resources and status become increasingly sidelined in the field of mating. Roughly half of all married men pursue some extramarital mating over their lifetime, and for those who do, liaisons occur at the expense of sex with their wives. Some men continue throughout life to compete for new mates, divorcing older wives and marrying younger women. Long attributed by traditional scientists to the fragile male ego, to psychosexual immaturity, to “male menopause,” or to a culture of youth, men’s effort to mate with younger women as they age instead reflects a universal evolved desire that does not go away.

One startling by-product of the differences in mating strategies of the sexes over the lifetime is that men die at an earlier age than women. This is a predictable consequence of the greater risk taking and intrasexual competition of men as they pursue the status and resources that bring about success in mating. With increasing age, the ratio of men to women becomes increasingly skewed, resulting in a surplus of women, especially among those with higher education. For women who reenter the mating market, the sex ratio imbalance becomes worse with each passing year. Both sexes have evolved mechanisms designed to shift strategies depending on changes in the sex ratio.

Given all the changes that befall men and women over their lifetimes, it is remarkable that in fact 50 percent of them manage to remain together through thick and thin. The lifelong convergence of interests between two genetically unrelated individuals may be the most extraordinary feat in the evolutionary story of human mating. Just as we have evolved mechanisms that draw us into conflict, we have adaptations that enable us to live harmoniously with the other sex. My lab’s massive cross-cultural study, for example, found that as men and women age they place less value on physical appearance in a mate and more value on enduring qualities such as dependability and having a pleasing disposition—qualities important for long-term mating success. The adaptations that promote this strategic harmony between the sexes, just as much as the mechanisms that produce strife, stem from the adaptive logic of human mating.





