Social Status

An examination of traditional hunter-gatherer societies, which are our closest guide to what ancestral conditions were probably like, suggests that ancestral men had clearly defined status hierarchies. In traditional societies today, resources flow freely to those at the top and trickle down slowly to those at the bottom.14 Traditional tribes such as the Tiwi (an aboriginal group residing on two small islands off the coast of northern Australia), the Yanomamö of Venezuela, the Ache of Paraguay, and the !Kung tribe of Botswana are replete with people described as “head men” and “big men” who wield great power and enjoy the resource privileges of prestige. An ancestral man’s social status provided a powerful cue to his possession of resources.

Henry Kissinger once remarked that power is a potent aphrodisiac. Women desire men who command a high position in society because social status is a universal cue to the control of resources. Along with status come better food, more abundant territory, and superior health care. Greater social status bestows on children social opportunities missed by the children of lower-ranked males. Male children in families of higher social status worldwide typically have access to more mates and better-quality mates. In one study of 186 societies ranging from the Mbuti Pygmies of Africa to the Aleut of Alaska, high-status men invariably had greater wealth and more wives than lower-status men, and their children were better nourished.15

Women in the United States express clear preferences for potential mates who have high social status or a high-status profession, qualities that are viewed as only slightly less important than good financial prospects.16 In the 1990s, using a rating scale from “irrelevant” or “unimportant” to “indispensable,” my colleagues and I asked participants from Massachusetts, Michigan, Texas, and California to rate the importance of a potential mate’s social status; women rated it as between important and indispensable, whereas men rated it as merely desirable but not very important.17 In a study of 5,000 college students, women listed status, prestige, rank, position, power, standing, station, and high place as important considerably more frequently than men did.18

David Schmitt and I conducted a study of casual and committed mating to discover which characteristics people especially value in potential spouses, as contrasted with potential sex partners.19 Several hundred individuals rated sixty-seven characteristics for their desirability or undesirability in the short or long term. Women judged the likelihood of success in a profession and the possession of a promising career to be highly desirable in a spouse. Significantly, they saw these cues to future status as more desirable in potential spouses than in casual sex partners.

American women also place great value on education and professional degrees in mates—characteristics that are strongly linked with social status. Women rate lack of education as highly undesirable in a potential husband. The cliché that women prefer to marry doctors, lawyers, professors, successful entrepreneurs, and other professionals seems to correspond with reality. Women shun men who are easily dominated by other men or who fail to command the respect of the group.

Women’s desire for status shows up in everyday life. A colleague overheard a conversation among four women at a restaurant. They were all complaining that there were no eligible men around. Yet these women were surrounded by male waiters, none of whom was wearing a wedding ring. Waiters, who do not have a high-status occupation, were apparently not even considered by these women. What the women really meant was not that there were no eligible men, but that there were no eligible men of acceptable social status.

Women on the mating market look for “eligible” men. The word eligible is a euphemism for “not having his resources already committed elsewhere.” The frequency with which the word appears in the combination “eligible bachelor” reveals the mating desires of women. When women append an adverb to this phrase, it becomes “most eligible bachelor,” referring not to the man’s eligibility but rather to his social status and the magnitude of his resources. It is code for the highest-status, most resource-laden unattached man around. Most homeless and jobless men are eligible, in the sense that they are available as mates, but most women are not interested in them.

The importance that women grant to social status in mates is not limited to the United States or even to capitalist countries. In the vast majority of the thirty-seven cultures included in the international study on choosing a mate, women valued social status more than men in a prospective mate—in both communist and socialist countries, among both Croatians and Chinese, among both Christians and Muslims, in both the tropics and the northern climes.20 For example, women valued status 63 percent more than men in Taiwan, 30 percent more in Zambia, 38 percent more in Germany, and 40 percent more in Brazil. Women see social status more as a “necessity” than as a “luxury” when it comes to long-term mating.21

Because hierarchies are universal features among human groups and resources flow to those who rise in the hierarchy, women solve the adaptive problem of acquiring resources in part by preferring men who are high in status. Social status gives a woman a strong indicator of the ability of a man to invest in her and her children. The scientific evidence across many cultures supports the evolutionary prediction that women are attuned to this cue to the acquisition of resources. Women worldwide prefer to marry up. Those women in our evolutionary past who failed to marry up tended to be less able to provide for themselves and their children.


