Cruelty and Unkindness

Worldwide, one of the most highly valued characteristics in a committed mate is kindness. It signals a willingness to engage in a cooperative alliance, an essential ingredient for success in long-term mating. Disagreeable people make poor mates. Mates who are irritable, violent, abusive, derogatory, beat children, destroy possessions, neglect chores, and alienate friends impose severe costs psychologically, socially, and physically.

Given these costs, cruelty, maltreatment, and ruthlessness rank among the most frequent causes of marital breakup in the cross-cultural study on conjugal dissolution, cited in fifty-four societies. In all cultures these traits are exceeded only by adultery and infertility as causes for splitting up.35 According to one study of marital dissolution, 63 percent of divorced women reported that their husbands abused them emotionally, and 29 percent reported that their husbands abused them physically.36

Unkindness and psychological cruelty may in some cases be related to events that occur during the course of a marriage, particularly adultery and infertility. Infertility, for example, often sparks harsh words between mates in tribal India. One Indian husband said: “We went to each other for seven years till we were weary, and still there was no child; every time my wife’s period began she abused me saying, ‘Are you a man? Haven’t you any strength?’ And I used to feel miserable and ashamed.”37 Eventually, the couple divorced.

Adultery also provokes cruelty and unkindness. When a Quiche woman commits adultery, her husband is likely to nag, insult, scold, abuse, and even starve her.38 Worldwide, adulterous wives are beaten, raped, scorned, verbally abused, and injured by enraged husbands.39 Thus, some forms of unkindness are evoked by reproductively damaging events that occur within the marriage. Cruelty and unkindness, in other words, may in part be symptoms of other underlying causes of divorce. Psychological adaptations and behavioral strategies become activated to solve these costly problems.

In other cases, unkindness is a personality characteristic of one spouse that is stable over time.40 In my lab’s study of newlywed couples, we examined the links between the personality characteristics of one spouse and the problems they caused their mates. The wives of disagreeable husbands expressed distress because their husbands were condescending, physically abusive, verbally abusive, unfaithful, inconsiderate, moody, insulting, and self-centered.41 The wives of disagreeable men complain that their husbands treat them as inferiors, demand too much time and attention, and ignore their wives’ feelings. They slap their wives, hit them, and call them nasty names. They have sex with other women. They fail to help with the household chores. They abuse alcohol and insult their wives’ appearance. Not surprisingly, spouses of disagreeable people tend to be miserable with the marriage, and by the fourth year of marriage many seek separation and divorce.

Given the premium that people place on kindness in a mate, it is not surprising that one of the most effective tactics for getting rid of a bad mate is to act mean, cruel, caustic, and quarrelsome. Men and women say that effective tactics for getting mates to leave include treating them badly, insulting them to others publicly, intentionally hurting their feelings, creating a fight, yelling without explanation, and escalating a trivial disagreement into a fight.

Cruelty and unkindness are used worldwide as a tactic for expelling a mate. Among the Quiche, when a husband wants to get rid of his wife, often because of her infidelities, he makes her position unbearable through a variety of means: “The undesired wife is nagged, insulted, and starved; her husband scolds and abuses her; he is openly unfaithful. He may marry another woman or even outrage his wife’s dignity by introducing a prostitute into the house.”42 All these cruel acts reflect the opposite of the kindness that is central to men’s and women’s universal preferences in a mate.


