Love, Kindness, and Commitment

A man’s possession of assets such as health, status, resources, intelligence, and emotional stability, however, does not guarantee his willingness to commit them to a particular woman. Some men show a tremendous reluctance to marry or commit. Some prefer playing the field of singledom and seek a series of casual sex partners. Some popular online dating apps, such as Tinder, facilitate this short-term strategy. Women sometimes derogate men for this hesitancy, calling them “commitment dodgers,” “commitment phobics,” “paranoid about commitment,” and “fearful of the M word.”56 And women’s negative reaction to these proclivities makes sense given the large asymmetries in the costs of sex. Because women historically incurred large costs and heavy investment as a result of sex, pregnancy, and childbirth, it often has been reproductively advantageous for them to seek some level of commitment from men with whom they have sex.

The weight that women attach to commitment is revealed in the following true story (the names are changed). Mark and Susan had been going out with each other for two years and had been living together for six months. He was a well-off forty-two-year-old professional, she a medical student of twenty-eight. Susan pressed for a decision about marriage—they were in love, and she wanted to have children within a few years. But Mark balked. He had been married before, and divorced. If he ever married again, he wanted to be absolutely sure it would be permanent. As Susan continued to press for a decision, Mark raised the possibility of a prenuptial agreement. She resisted, feeling that this violated the spirit of marriage. Finally, they agreed that by a date four months in the future he would have decided one way or the other. The date came and went, and still Mark could not make a decision. Susan told him that she was leaving him, moved out, and started dating another man. Mark panicked. He called her up and begged her to come back, saying that he had changed his mind and would marry her. He promised a new car. He promised that there would be no prenuptial agreement. But it was too late. Mark’s failure to commit was too strong a negative signal to Susan. It dealt the final blow to their relationship. She was gone forever.

Women past and present face the adaptive problem of choosing men who not only have the necessary resources but also show a willingness to commit those resources specifically to them. This problem may be more difficult than it seems at first. Although resources can often be directly observed, commitment cannot. Instead, gauging commitment requires looking for probabilistic cues. Love is one of the most important cues to commitment.

Feelings and acts of love are not recent products of particular Western views, contrary to some conventional beliefs in the social sciences. Love is universal. Thoughts, emotions, and actions of love are experienced by people in all cultures worldwide—from the Zulu in the southern tip of Africa to the Inuit in the north of Alaska. In a survey of 168 diverse cultures from around the world, the anthropologist William Jankowiak found strong evidence for the presence of romantic love in nearly 90 percent of them. For the remaining 10 percent, the anthropological records were too sketchy to definitely verify the presence of love. When the sociologist Sue Sprecher and her colleagues interviewed 1,667 men and women in Russia, Japan, and the United States, they found that 61 percent of the Russian men and 73 percent of the Russian women were currently in love. Comparable figures for the Japanese were 41 percent of the men and 63 percent of the women. Among Americans, 53 percent of the men and 63 percent of the women acknowledged being in love. Clearly, love is not a phenomenon limited to Western cultures.57

To identify precisely what love is and how it is linked to commitment, my lab initiated a study of acts of love.58 First, we asked fifty women and fifty men from the University of California, Berkeley, and the University of Michigan to think of people they knew who were currently in love and to describe actions performed by those people that reflected or exemplified their love. A different group of college men and women evaluated each of the nominated 115 acts for how typical it was of love. Acts of commitment topped the women’s and men’s lists, being viewed as most central to love. Such acts included giving up romantic relations with others, talking of marriage, and expressing a desire to have children with the person. When performed by a man, these acts of love signaled the intention to commit resources to one woman.

Commitment has many facets. One major component of commitment is fidelity, exemplified by the act of remaining faithful to a partner when apart. Fidelity signals the exclusive commitment of sexual resources to a single partner. Another aspect of commitment is the channeling of resources to the loved one, such as buying an expensive gift or ring. These acts signal a serious intention to commit economic resources to a long-term relationship. Emotional support is yet another facet of commitment, revealed by behavior such as being available in times of trouble and listening to the partner’s problems. Commitment entails a channeling of time, energy, and effort to the partner’s needs at the expense of fulfilling one’s own personal goals. Acts of reproduction, such as planning to have children, also represent a direct commitment to one’s partner’s genes. All these acts of love signal the commitment of sexual, economic, emotional, and genetic resources to one person.

Since love is a worldwide phenomenon, and since a primary function of acts of love is to signal commitment of reproductively relevant resources, women should place a premium on love in the process of choosing a mate. To find out if they do, Sue Sprecher and her colleagues asked American, Russian, and Japanese students whether they would marry someone who had all the qualities they desired in a mate if they were not in love with that person.59 Fully 89 percent of American women and 82 percent of Japanese women said that they would still require love for marriage, even if all other important qualities were present. Among Russians, only 59 percent of women would not marry someone with whom they were not in love, no matter how many desirable qualities that person had. Although a clear majority of Russian women required love, the lower threshold may reflect the tremendous difficulty Russian women have in finding a mate because of the severe shortage of men in their country, especially men capable of investing resources. These variations reveal the effects of cultural context on mating. Nonetheless, the majority of women in all three cultures saw love as an indispensable ingredient in marriage.

Direct studies of preferences in a mate confirm the centrality of love. In a study of 162 Texas women college students, out of 100 characteristics examined, the quality of being loving was the most strongly desired in a potential husband.60 The thirty-seven-culture study confirmed the universal importance of love. Among eighteen possible characteristics, mutual attraction or love proved to be the most highly valued in a potential mate by both sexes, being rated a 2.87 by women and 2.81 by men (out of 3.00). Nearly all women and men, from the enclaves of South Africa to the bustling streets of Brazilian cities, gave love the top rating, indicating its indispensability for a committed mateship. Women place a premium on love in order to secure the commitment of men’s economic, emotional, and sexual resources.

Two additional personal characteristics, kindness and sincerity, are critical to securing long-term commitment. In one study of 800 personal advertisements, sincerity was the single most frequently listed characteristic sought by women.61 Another analysis of 1,111 personal advertisements again showed that sincerity was the quality most frequently sought by women—indeed, women advertisers sought sincerity nearly four times as often as men advertisers.62 Sincerity in personal advertisements is a code word for commitment, and women use it to screen out men seeking casual sex without any commitment.

People worldwide depend on kindness not from strangers, but rather from their mates. As shown by the thirty-seven-culture study, women have a strong preference for mates who are kind and understanding. In thirty-two out of the thirty-seven cultures, in fact, the sexes were identical in valuing kindness as one of the three most important qualities out of a possible thirteen in a mate. Only in Japan and Taiwan did men give greater emphasis than women to kindness. And only in Nigeria, Israel, and France did women give greater emphasis than men to kindness. In no culture, however, was kindness in a mate ranked lower than third out of thirteen for either sex. Women desired kindness in a mate especially when it was directed toward them, and less so when it was directed toward other people or other women, supporting the notion that women prize dispositions in men to commit their resources selectively rather than indiscriminately.63

Kindness is an enduring personality characteristic that has many components, but at the core of all of them is the commitment of resources. The trait signals an empathy toward children, a willingness to put a mate’s needs before one’s own, and a willingness to channel energy and effort toward a mate’s goals rather than exclusively and selfishly to one’s own goals.64 Kindness, in other words, signals the ability and willingness of a potential mate to commit energy and resources selflessly to a partner.

A lack of kindness signals selfishness, an inability or unwillingness to commit, and a high likelihood that costly burdens will be inflicted on a spouse. The study of newlyweds, for example, found that women married to unkind men complained that their spouses abused them both verbally and physically by hitting, slapping, or spitting at them. Unkind men tend to be condescending, putting down their wife’s opinions as stupid or inferior. They are selfish, monopolizing shared resources. They are inconsiderate, failing to do any housework. They are neglectful, failing to show up as promised. Finally, they have more extramarital affairs, suggesting that these men are unable or unwilling to commit to a monogamous relationship.65 Unkind men look out for themselves and have trouble committing to anything much beyond that.

Because sex is one of the most valuable reproductive resources women can offer, they have evolved psychological mechanisms that cause them to resist giving it away indiscriminately. Requiring love, sincerity, and kindness is a way of securing a commitment of resources commensurate with the value of the resource that women give to men. Requiring love and kindness helps women to solve the critical adaptive mating problem of securing the commitment of resources from a man that can aid in the survival and reproduction of her offspring.


