Infertility

Although ring doves tend to be monogamous—more so than many bird species—they experience a divorce rate of about 25 percent a season. The major cause of breaking a bond is infertility—the failure of the pair to reproduce.15 Pairs of ring doves that produce chicks in one breeding season are highly likely to mate again the next season; those that fail to reproduce in one season seek out alternative mates the next season.

Failure to produce children is also a leading cause of divorce for humans. Couples with no children divorce far more often than couples with two or more children. According to a United Nations study of millions of people in forty-five societies, 39 percent of divorces occur when there are no children, 26 percent when there is only a single child, 19 percent when there are two, and fewer than 3 percent when there are four or more. The toll on marriage caused by childlessness occurs regardless of the duration of the marriage.16 Children strengthen marital bonds, reducing the probability of divorce, by creating a powerful commonality of genetic interest between a man and a woman. Failure to produce offspring that transport the genes of both parents into the future deprives a couple of this powerful common bond.

Infertility is exceeded only by infidelity as the most frequently cited cause of divorce across societies. In the cross-cultural study of conjugal dissolution, seventy-five societies reported infertility or sterility as a cause of divorce. Of these, twelve specified the sterility of either the husband or the wife. But sterility, like adultery, appears to be strongly gender-linked. Whereas sterility ascribed exclusively to the man was cited as a cause of divorce in twelve societies, sterility ascribed exclusively to the woman was cited in thirty societies—perhaps reflecting another type of double standard by which women are blamed more than men. In the remaining twenty-one societies, it is impossible to discern whether or not sterility on the part of the man, the woman, or both was a cause.

Not all societies sanction divorce. Where divorce is not authorized, however, provisions are often made for separating a man and woman who do not produce children. In the Andaman Islands off the southern coast of Asia, for example, a marriage is not regarded as consummated unless a child is born.17 Many villages in Japan hold off recording a marriage until long after a wedding, and frequently the marriage is not entered into the family register in the village office until the first child is born.18 When marriages are not regarded as legally legitimate until children are born, infertility effectively becomes a cause of marital dissolution.

Old age is linked with lower fertility. This linkage is stronger in women than in men, but even though sperm quality and concentration per ejaculate declines somewhat with age, men in their sixties, seventies, and eighties can still sire children, and they do. Among the Yanomamö, one particularly productive man had children whose ages spanned fifty years. Among the Tiwi of northern Australia, older men frequently monopolize women thirty or more years younger and sire children with them. Although couples in Western culture tend to be more similar in age than those among the Tiwi and Yanomamö, it is not uncommon for a man to divorce a postmenopausal wife and start a new family with a younger woman.19

The difference in the reproductive biology of men and women leads to the expectation that older age in a wife will lead to divorce more often than older age in a husband. Although the cross-cultural study on conjugal dissolution did not find old age to be a frequently cited cause of divorce, it was cited in eight societies studied, and in all eight it was the old age of the woman, never the man, that caused divorce.20 When men divorce, they almost invariably marry younger women.

In evolutionary terms, it makes perfect sense that infertility and infidelity are the most prevalent causes of divorce worldwide. Both represent the strongest and most direct failures to deliver the reproductive resources that provide the evolutionary raison d’être for long-term mating. People do not consciously calculate that their fitness suffers from these events. Rather, infidelity and infertility are adaptive problems that exerted selection pressure on human ancestors for a psychology attuned to reproductive failures. Just as having sex tends to lead to the production of babies even though the people involved may have no awareness of the reproductive logic involved, so anger leads a person to leave an unfaithful or infertile mate, with no conscious articulation of the underlying adaptive logic being required. The fact that couples who are childless by choice are nonetheless devastated by infidelity shows that our psychological mechanisms continue to operate in modern contexts, even those far removed from the selection pressures that gave rise to them.


