Sexual Orientation

“Heterosexual orientation is a paradigmatic psychological adaptation,” writes Michael Bailey, one of the world’s most prominent experts on sexual orientation.16 His reasoning is compelling. Among sexually reproducing species, males and females must mate with each other for successful reproduction. Any orientation that lowers the likelihood of successful reproduction will be ruthlessly weeded out. Although controversy surrounds estimates, most scientists converge on the finding that roughly 96 to 97 percent of all men and 98 to 99 percent of all women have a primary orientation toward heterosexuality.

The persistence of a small percentage of primarily or exclusively homosexual men and women, however, poses a genuine evolutionary puzzle. In the several hundred public lectures I’ve given on human sexual strategies, the question “What about homosexuality?” is by far the most frequently asked. It’s a mystery of human mating and an empirical enigma for evolutionary theory.17 The riddle is made more intriguing by two known facts. First, a number of twin studies show that sexual orientation is moderately heritable, suggesting a partial genetic basis.18 Second, a handful of other studies show beyond a reasonable doubt that homosexual men have a decisively lower rate of reproduction than heterosexual men.19 How can a sexual orientation that is partly inherited continue to persist in the face of continual evolutionary selection against it?

We will explore some of these issues later in the book and discuss scientific findings about the links between sexual orientation and mate preferences and sexuality, but several key conceptual issues are worth noting here. First, there are at least three different senses of the phrase “sexual orientation.” One can be called primary sexual orientation and refers to whom one is sexually attracted to—men, women, both (bisexual), or neither (asexual). Another is gender identity—whether one subjectively feels like a man or woman, feels like both, or neither. Still another is sexual behavior, referring to the gender of the individuals with whom one actually has sex. These distinctions are critical, since we witness many combinations and permutations in individual people. For example, some individuals may be primarily attracted to one sex but engage in sexual behavior with the other sex out of curiosity (sexual experimentation) or social constraint (lack of available sex partners corresponding to one’s primary sexual orientation).

Another critical distinction is that male and female sexual orientation have different natures and developmental trajectories. Male sexual orientation tends to appear early in development and rarely changes dramatically over time, whereas female sexuality appears to be far more flexible and fluid over the life span. For example, male sexual orientation tends to be bimodally distributed, with most men either strongly heterosexual or strongly homosexual—there are relatively few bisexual men. Women’s sexual orientation, by contrast, varies more smoothly along a continuum from highly heterosexual through a series of bisexual gradations to a nearly exclusive preference for same-sex partners.

Another difference is that women appear able to switch orientations more easily, evidence of the greater flexibility of their sexuality. Anecdotally, there is the “LUG” phenomenon found in women’s colleges—Lesbian Until Graduation. The actress Anne Heche lived for several years in a lesbian relationship with comedienne and actress Ellen Degeneres. After they broke up, Heche married a man and had a child with him. Similarly, some women marry when they are young, have children, and then in middle age switch to a lesbian lifestyle. Although some men “come out of the closet” after a socially prescribed marriage to someone to whom they are not sexually attracted, it is still very likely that their primary sexual orientation was set relatively early in life and had never really changed.

Once we recognize that sexual orientation is not singular and that there are important differences between sexual attraction, sexual identity, and sexual behavior, scientific understanding of variations in human sexuality is likely to accelerate. We must also recognize that there is probably no single theory that can explain the many varieties of human sexuality, including gay males, lesbians, bisexuals, transgendered individuals, and asexuals, much less one that can explain the profound individual differences among those with these different orientations. We delve into the origins and nature of sexual orientation in greater detail in Chapters 2, 3, and 4, with a special focus on mate preferences, sexual motivation, and preferred mating strategies.


