Tactics for Coping with Breakups

Breaking up a romantic relationship is among the most traumatic life events people experience. In studies of stressful life events, it always ranks in the top five. Only experiences such as the death of a child or the death of a spouse are seen as more stressful. Friendship networks can become strained, and plunging into the mating market anew can be frightening. Breakups can threaten one’s social status since our mates are often seen by others as key contributors to the esteem in which we are held. Moreover, breakups often end the flow of benefits to which we have become accustomed, be they economic, sexual, or social.

The scientific study of coping tactics has just broken ground.45 Women and men alike often try to remain friends with their exes so that the benefits of the relationship do not cease entirely or to minimize the chances of the former partner seeking revenge. Some do the opposite, however, and avoid the ex entirely. Women more than men tap their friendships to discuss the former relationship, hash out its details, mull over what went wrong, and ruminate over future prospects. Both genders sometimes seek sex with others. As one woman we interviewed put it, “The best way to get over a man is to get under another one.”46

Women are more likely than men to go shopping as a coping tactic.47 Shopping for new clothes or makeup can enhance a woman’s self-esteem and increase her physical attractiveness, paving the way for reentry into the mating market.

Some cope with breakups by seeking solace in alcohol or drugs. Some ruminate endlessly, prolonging their pain by keeping tabs on their former partner’s whereabouts or dating activities and monitoring their online presense. And some start stalking their ex in an attempt to remate with them, to interfere with their ex’s attempts to remate, or simply to seek revenge.48

Eventually, most people move on, reenter the mating market, and begin the process of mate selection, mate attraction, and courtship all over again.


