Physiological Clues to Sexual Strategies and the Mystery of Female Orgasm

Existing adaptations in our psychology, anatomy, physiology, and behavior reflect prior evolutionary selection pressures. Just as our current fear of snakes betrays an ancestral hazard, so our sexual anatomy and physiology reveal an ancient story of short-term sexual strategies. Important clues to that story have come to light through careful studies of men’s testes size, ejaculate volume, variations in sperm production, and a possible function of female orgasm.

Large testes typically evolve as a consequence of intense sperm competition when the sperm from two or more males occupy the reproductive tract of the female at the same time.5 Sperm competition exerts a selection pressure on males to produce large ejaculates containing numerous sperm. In the race to the valuable egg, the more voluminous sperm-laden ejaculate has an advantage in displacing the ejaculate of other men inside the woman’s body.

The testes size of men, relative to their body weight, is far larger than that of gorillas and orangutans. Male testes account for 0.018 percent of body weight in gorillas and 0.048 percent in orangutans. In contrast, men’s testes account for 0.079 percent of body weight—60 percent more than that of orangutans and more than four times that of gorillas. Men’s relatively large testes provide one solid piece of evidence that women in human evolutionary history sometimes had sex with more than one man within a time span of a few days. The comment made in many cultures that a man has “big balls” may be a metaphorical expression with a literal referent. But humans do not possess the largest testes of all the primates. Human testicular volume is substantially smaller than that of the highly promiscuous chimpanzee, whose testes account for 0.269 percent of body weight, which is more than three times the percentage of men. These findings suggest that our human ancestors rarely reached the chimpanzee’s extreme of promiscuity.6

Another clue to the evolutionary existence of casual mating comes from variations in sperm production and insemination.7 In a study to determine the effect of separating mates from each other on sperm production, thirty-five couples agreed to provide ejaculates resulting from sexual intercourse, either from condoms or from the flowback (the gelatinous mass of seminal fluid spontaneously ejected by a woman at various points after intercourse).8 All the couples had been separated from each other for varying intervals of time.

Men’s sperm count increased dramatically with the increasing amount of time the couple had been apart. The more time spent apart, the more sperm the husbands inseminated in their wives when they finally had sex. When the couples spent 100 percent of their time together, men inseminated only 389 million sperm per ejaculate. But when the couples spent only 5 percent of their time together, men inseminated 712 million sperm per ejaculate, or almost double the amount. Sperm insemination increases when other men’s sperm might be inside the wife’s reproductive tract at the same time, as a consequence of the opportunity provided for extramarital sex by the couple’s separation. This increase in sperm is precisely what would be expected if humans had an ancestral history of some casual sex and marital infidelity.

The increase in sperm insemination by the husband upon prolonged separation gives his sperm a greater chance in the race to the egg by crowding out or displacing any interlopers’ sperm. A man appears to inseminate just enough sperm to replace the sperm that have died inside the woman since his last sexual episode with her, thereby “topping off” his mate to a particular level to keep the population of his sperm inside her relatively constant. Men appear to carry a physiological mechanism that elevates sperm count when their wives may have had opportunities to be unfaithful.

The physiology of women’s orgasm provides another clue to an evolutionary history of short-term mating. Once it was thought that a woman’s orgasm functions to make her sleepy and keep her reclined, thereby decreasing the likelihood that sperm will flow out and increasing the likelihood of conceiving. But if the function of orgasm were to keep the woman reclined so as to delay flowback, then more sperm would be retained when flowback is delayed. That does not happen. Rather, there is no link between the timing of the flowback and the number of sperm retained.9

Women on average eject roughly 35 percent of the sperm within thirty minutes of the time of insemination. If the woman has an orgasm, however, she retains 70 percent of the sperm and ejects only 30 percent. Lack of an orgasm leads to the ejection of more sperm. This evidence is consistent with the theory that women’s orgasm functions to suck up the sperm from the vagina into the cervical canal and uterus, increasing the probability of conception.

A key to the mystery of female orgasm appears to be the link between female orgasm and sperm retention, combined with a hidden side of female sexuality—women’s sexual infidelities. Kinsey found that women were almost twice as likely to achieve orgasms with their affair partners as with their husbands. A British study found that women have more frequent high-sperm-retention orgasms—those that occur within two minutes after the male orgasm—with their affair partners than with their husbands. The clincher, however, may be the timing of lunchtime romance at the No-Tell Motel: women who have affairs appear to time their sexual liaisons to coincide with the most fertile phase of their cycle—prior to or at ovulation. Indeed, the rate of sexual intercourse with an affair partner during peak fertility is three times as high as the rate during the low-fertile post-ovulatory phase.10

Female orgasm may function as a selection device to choose which man will end up fertilizing her eggs, a man who is not necessarily her husband. Women are more orgasmic with regular mates who have good genetic quality, as indexed by anatomical measures of symmetry and judgments of physical attractiveness. But if they are having affairs, women preferentially choose affair partners of high genetic quality and then experience more frequent sexual orgasms in the context of their liaisons. For women having affairs, orgasm may facilitate a mating strategy of getting the best of both worlds—investment from one man who provides parenting and resources for her children and good genes from another man who provides little investment but who increases the genetic quality of her children.

Although my reading of scientific evidence leads me to conclude that the female orgasm shows at least some design hallmarks of adaptation, skeptics of this conclusion—advocates of the hypothesis that female orgasm is a non-adaptive by-product analogous to male nipples—still have plenty of ammunition to work with. No current adaptationist hypothesis, for example, can explain why there appear to be huge individual differences and cultural differences in the occurrence of female orgasm. Further-more, it is entirely possible that the female orgasm is neither 100 percent adaptation nor 100 percent by-product, but rather contains certain features that are by-products combined with some adaptive modification.

This may not be good news for the husbands of women seeking sex outside marriage, but it suggests that women have evolved strategies that function for their own reproductive benefit in the context of extramarital affairs, perhaps by securing good genes from one man and investment from their regular mate.

In addition to this anatomical and physiological evidence, psychological and behavioral evidence also suggest a long evolutionary history of casual, short-term mating.


