Women’s Many Preferences

We now have the outlines of an answer to the enigma of what women want. Women are judicious, prudent, and discerning about the men they consent to mate with because they have so many valuable reproductive resources to offer. Those with valuable resources rarely give them away indiscriminately. The costs in reproductive currency of failing to exercise choice were too great for ancestral women, who would have risked beatings, food deprivation, disease, abuse of children, and abandonment. By contrast, the benefits of exercising choice—in nourishment, protection, gene quality, and paternal investment in children—were abundant.

Committed mates may bring with them a treasure trove of resources. Selecting a long-term mate who has the relevant resources is clearly an extraordinarily complex endeavor. For women, it involves at least a dozen distinctive preferences, each corresponding to a resource that helps them solve critical adaptive problems.

That women seek resources in a long-term mate may seem obvious to the casual observer, but until the thirty-seven-culture study, that preference had not been scientifically documented worldwide. Moreover, because men’s resources and resource acquisition skills often cannot be directly discerned, women’s preferences are keyed to other qualities that signal the likely possession, or future acquisition, of resources. Indeed, women may be less influenced by money per se than by qualities that lead to resources, such as ambition, drive, status, intelligence, emotional stability, and mature age. Women scrutinize these personal qualities carefully because they reveal a man’s potential.

Potential, however, is not enough. Because many men with a high resource potential are themselves discriminating and are at times content with casual sex, women are faced with the problem of commitment. Seeking love and sincerity are two solutions to the commitment problem. Sincerity signals that the man is capable of commitment. Acts of love signal that he has in fact committed to a particular woman.

To have the love and commitment of a man who could be easily defeated by other men in the physical arena, however, would have been a problematic asset for ancestral women. Women mated to small, weak men lacking in physical prowess would have risked damage from other men and loss of the couple’s joint resources. Tall, strong, athletic men with V-shaped torsos offered ancestral women protection. In this way, their resources and commitment could be secured against incursion. Women who selected men in part for their strength and prowess were more likely to be successful at surviving and reproducing.

Resources, commitment, and protection do a woman little good if her husband sickens or dies, or if the couple is so mismatched that they fail to function as an effective team. The premium that women place on a man’s health ensures that husbands will be capable of providing these benefits over the long haul. And the premium that women place on similarity of interests and traits with their mate helps to ensure the convergence of mutually pursued goals. These multiple facets of current women’s mating preferences correspond precisely with the multiple facets of the adaptive problems faced by our women ancestors thousands of years ago.

Women, of course, do not evaluate potential mates one trait at a time. Men come as whole packages of qualities that must be accepted or rejected altogether.80 This inevitably requires trade-offs. A kind man may be willing to devote his entire life to one woman and have great potential as a father but may have fewer resources to provide. A strong, healthy, attractive man may be a sterling provider of resources and good genes but may be more tempted to be unfaithful. Moreover, many circumstances create shifts in women’s mate preferences—her personal resource acquisition ability, whether she is seeking a long-term mate or a casual sex partner, close kin in proximity, the sex ratio in the mating pool, and the presence of other women who are attracted to a particular man. The reason men have been baffled for so long about what women want is that women’s mate preferences are inherently complex, multifaceted, and context-dependent, reflecting the large number of intricate adaptive challenges our ancestral mothers confronted repeatedly over the long course of human evolutionary history.

Ancestral men were confronted with a different set of adaptive problems. So we must now shift perspective to gaze at ancestral women as potential mates through the eyes of our male forebears.





