Enhancing Appearance

Just as men’s successful tactics for attracting women depend on women’s desires in a mate, women’s attraction tactics depend on men’s preferences. Women who succeed appear reproductively valuable by embodying physical and behavioral cues that signal their youth and physical attractiveness. Women who fail to fulfill these qualities lose a competitive edge.

Because men place a premium on appearance, competition among women to attract men centers heavily on enhancing their physical attractiveness along youthful and healthful lines. Bolstering this practice is the cosmetics industry, which is supported mainly by women; although men are spending increasing amounts on cosmetic products, women still outspend men roughly nine to one. Women’s magazines include an avalanche of advertisements for beauty products. Men’s magazines, in contrast, advertise cars, electronics, and alcoholic beverages. Advertisements in men’s magazines that promise appearance enhancement are typically for muscle-building products or for deodorants and shower gels with scents advertised as being attractive to women.

Women do not compete to signal accurate information. Rather, they compete to activate men’s evolved psychological standards of beauty, which are keyed to youth and health. Because flushed cheeks and high color are cues that men use to gauge a woman’s health, women rouge their cheeks artificially to trigger men’s attraction. Because smooth, clear skin is one of men’s evolved desires, women cover up blemishes, use moisture cream, apply astringents, and get facelifts. Because lustrous hair is one of men’s evolved desires, women highlight, bleach, tint, or dye their hair, and they give it extra body with conditioners, egg yolks, beer, or weaves. Because full red lips trigger men’s evolved desires, women apply lipstick skillfully and even get injections to enlarge their lips for the “bee-stung” look. And because firm, youthful breasts stimulate men’s desires, women obtain breast implants and wear push-up bras.

Women report using makeup to accentuate their looks twenty times as often as men. Women go on diets to improve their figures, get new and interesting haircuts, and spend over an hour a day on their appearance—twice as much time as men spend on theirs. They lie out in the sun or go to tanning salons to achieve a healthy-looking glow. Appearance enhancement for attracting a mate is twice as effective for women as for men.25 In contrast, men who devote excessive attention to enhancing their appearance can hurt their competitive chances; people sometimes infer that they are narcissistic or self-absorbed.26

Women do more to improve their appearance than meets the eye. They use deceptive tactics to manipulate their appearance. They wear false fingernails to make their hands appear longer and their fingers more elegant; wear heels to accentuate leg length, bum protrusion, and calf shape; wear dark clothing and vertical stripes to appear thinner; apply spray tan to appear sun-kissed; pull in their stomachs or cinch their waists to enhance their waist-to-hip ratio; wear body-shaping undergarments like Spanx to appear leaner and firmer; wear padded bras to appear bustier; and highlight their hair to appear more youthful.

Women are well aware of the importance of appearance on the mating market. After interviews with women in singles bars, researchers reported that many of them “said that they went home from work before going out to the bars to do a whole revamping.” Often, before going out for the evening, they would take a bath, wash their hair, put on fresh makeup, and go through three changes of outfits before selecting one. “Primping for us counts more than for guys—they don’t need to worry about their looks as much.”27 The ability to make men’s heads turn signals a highly desirable mate and evokes advances from more men. This effect enlarges the pool of men and, in turn, gives women a greater ability to choose high-mate-value men.

Women do not merely strive to improve their own looks; they also disparage the looks of other women. Women in the derogation study mentioned that their rivals were fat, ugly, and unattractive, had “thunder thighs,” and had shapeless bodies. Making fun of a rival’s appearance is more effective for women in the sexual marketplace than in the marriage marketplace. And it is more effective for women than for men in both short-term and long-term mating contexts.

Women derogate other women’s appearance both to the desired men, to other women in their social circles, and directly to the rivals themselves. One woman in an upscale hotel bar described her tactic of looking at a rival’s hair and, without saying anything, taking out a hairbrush and handing it to her. Her rivals sometimes got up and left the bar. Often the practice succeeded in driving away her competition. Damaging the self-image of a rival is one way to clear the field.

Making public one’s disdain for another woman’s appearance enhances the effectiveness of this derogation tactic. One man from a fraternity reported being ridiculed mercilessly by his brothers after it became known that he had sex with a particularly unattractive woman. Men discovered having sex with unattractive women suffer social humiliation and lose status in the eyes of their peers.28

Since physical attractiveness is an attribute that is easy for men to observe directly, these findings raise an interesting puzzle: Why would derogatory verbal comments about other women work when men can gauge attractiveness with their own eyes? Derogation works in part by guiding men’s perceptions of women. Women can draw attention to flaws that are otherwise not noticed or salient, such as heavy thighs, a long nose, short fingers, close-set eyes, or an asymmetrical face, and make them salient. No human is without imperfections. Drawing attention to them magnifies their importance, especially if attention is drawn to efforts to conceal or disguise a weak spot. Women also exploit the fact that our judgments of attractiveness are influenced by other people’s judgments.29 Knowing that others find a woman unattractive causes a downward shift in our view of her appearance. Moreover, knowing that other people in our social environment do not believe that a woman is attractive actually renders her a less valuable asset as a mate. Even in a context with easily observed qualities, such as physical appearance and stature, there is plenty of room for the effective use of belittling tactics.

Modern cosmetology exploits women’s evolved psychology of competing for mates, and women who do not make effective use of methods to enhance their appearance hurt their chances at attracting valuable mates. This situation has created a runaway beauty competition in which the time, effort, and money expended on appearance have reached levels unprecedented in human history. Women in all cultures alter their appearance, but perhaps none as much as those in the West, which has the technology to exploit women’s desire to appear attractive through visual media unavailable to more traditional societies. The cosmetics industry does not create desires so much as it exploits the desires that are already there.

The journalist Naomi Wolf has described advertisements as creating a false ideal, which she calls “the beauty myth,” in order to subjugate women sexually, economically, and politically. The beauty myth is presumed to have taken on causal properties, undoing all the accomplishments of feminism in improving conditions for women. Some argue that the surgical technologies of breast implants and facelifts are designed to medically control women.30 They contend that the diet, cosmetics, and cosmetic surgery industries combined, totaling more than $53 billion a year, are motivated by the desire to subjugate women. Standards of beauty, the argument goes, are arbitrary—capriciously linked with age, highly variable across cultures, not universal in nature, and hence not a function of evolution.

These naive arguments fly in the face of the scientific evidence. Myths cannot have causal force; only the individuals who embrace myths can. Power structures cannot have causal force; only the individuals who wield power can. Wolf’s account of the beauty myth is terribly unflattering to women. It implies that women are passive pawns with no preferences of their own and no individuality, buffeted and brainwashed by forces like power structures, myths, and men conspiring to subjugate them.

In contrast, an evolutionary psychological perspective reveals that women have far more autonomy and choice in their deployment of attraction tactics than proponents of the beauty myth would have us believe. Women who seek a lasting mate, for example, have at their disposal a wide range of tactics, including displays of loyalty, signals of common interests, and acts of intelligence. Women purchase beauty products not because they have been brainwashed by the media, but because they have determined that using beauty products will increase their power to get what they want. Women are not unsuspecting dupes manipulated by the forces of Madison Avenue, but determine through their preferences which products they will consume—products that they perceive will enhance their value as a mate, friend, or group member.

Advertisements, however, do damage women. Women are bombarded with exploitative, photoshopped images that depict ideals unattainable by most women. These magnify a woman’s focus on appearance and at the same time fail to highlight the deeper personal qualities that are also critical to men’s desires, such as intelligence, personality, social skills, and compassion. The cosmetics industry exploits women’s evolved concern over appearance and then increases their insecurity by elevating the standards of attractiveness to which women aspire with images of a deluge of seemingly flawless, world-class models that are in fact deceptively photoshopped. This duplicity increases the apparent beauty of other women—their competition—and may lower women’s self-esteem. It may also distort women’s and men’s understanding of the actual mating pool and mating market.

All women today are unique, distinctive winners of a 5 million year beauty contest of sexual selection. Every female ancestor of the readers of these words was attractive enough to obtain enough investment to raise at least one child to reproductive age. Every male ancestor was attractive enough to attract a woman to have his child. It is worth keeping in mind, when confronted with a sea of troubles in the mating game, that every one of us is an evolutionary success story.


