—ROBERT SMITH, Sperm Competition and the Evolution of Mating Systems

IMAGINE THAT AN attractive person of the opposite sex walks up to you on a college campus and says: “Hi, I’ve been noticing you around town lately, and I find you very attractive. Would you go to bed with me?” How would you respond? If you are like 100 percent of the women in one study in Florida, you would give an emphatic no. You might be offended, insulted, or plain puzzled by the request out of the blue. But if you are a man, the odds are 75 percent that you would say yes.1 You would most likely feel flattered by the request.

Perhaps there is something odd about the culture in Florida, so other researchers sought to replicate these findings. Particularly informative are studies based in sexually liberal cultures such as France and Denmark. In France, for example, women are increasingly consuming pornography, having sex with men they meet on the Internet, and having a larger number of casual sex partners. When French women were approached with a request for sex, however, only 3 percent agreed to have sex with the approaching stranger if he was highly attractive, and 0 percent if he was only average.2 In contrast, a full 83 percent of French men consented to sex with an attractive woman, and 60 percent agreed if she was average in attractiveness. Studies carried out in Denmark produced similar results, although men in committed romantic relationships were considerably less likely to consent to sex than were single men.3 Men and women react differently when it comes to casual sex, and willingness to consent to sex with strangers differs strongly by gender across cultures.

Casual sex typically requires mutual consent, however. Ancestral men could not have had temporary hookups unaided. At least some ancestral women must have been sexually willing or eager some of the time, barring coerced sex (a topic explored in depth in Chapter 7). If all women had mated for life with a single man—and in most traditional cultures most postpubertal females are married—opportunities for casual sex would seem to have vanished.4 So short-term sex would have meant that women were engaging in extramarital affairs. One of the keys to ancestral women’s extramarital sexual opportunities was a lapse in mate guarding. Hunting opened windows of opportunity, because men went off for hours, days, or weeks to procure meat.

In spite of the prevalence and evolutionary significance of casual sex, until recently most scientific research on human mating has centered on long-term mating. The typically transient and secretive nature of casual sex makes it difficult to study. In Alfred Kinsey’s classic research on sexual behavior, for example, questions about extramarital sex prompted many people to refuse to be interviewed altogether. Among those who did consent to an interview, many declined to answer questions about extramarital sex.

Our relative ignorance about casual sexual encounters also reflects deeply held values. Many of us shun the promiscuous and scorn the unfaithful because such people often interfere with our own sexual strategies. From the perspective of a married woman or man, for example, the presence of promiscuous people endangers marital fidelity. From the perspective of a single woman or man seeking marriage, the presence of promiscuous people lowers the likelihood of finding someone willing to commit. We derogate male short-term strategists as cads, womanizers, or “man whores” because we want to discourage casual sex, at least among some people. People also derogate women by “slut-shaming.” Casual sex is in many ways still a taboo topic. But it fascinates us. We must look closer and ask why it looms so large in our mating repertoire.

Although women and men alike have the whole repertoire of mating strategies—long-term mating, short-term mating, mate poaching, infidelity, and so on—there do exist somewhat stable individual differences, sometimes called sociosexual orientation. Some people are strongly inclined to long-term, high-investment mating. They want sex in the context of a loving committed relationship. Others are more inclined to short-term mating; casual sex without love or encumbering commitment feels fine to them. Whereas long-term maters search for “the one and only,” short-term maters thrive on sexual variety and tend to experience a larger number of sex partners. So we turn now to the clues present in a deep-time evolutionary history of short-term mating.


