—JEROME BARKOW, LEDA COSMIDES, AND JOHN TOOBY, The Adapted Mind

UNDERSTANDING HUMAN MATING requires recognizing that our strategies are multiple, flexible, and contingent on context, culture, and personal condition. Our complex psychological adaptations, designed by a long history of evolution, give us a versatile strategic repertoire for coping with the challenges of mating. With this repertoire, we tailor our mating decisions to individual and social circumstances in a valiant effort to fulfill our desires and, ideally, fulfill the desires of special others. In the mating marketplace, no behavior is inevitable or genetically preordained—neither infidelity nor monogamy, neither sexual violence nor sexual tranquility, neither jealous guarding nor sexual indifference. Men are not doomed to have affairs because of an insatiable lust for sexual variety. Women are not doomed to dismiss men who lack status and prestige. We are not slaves to sex roles dictated by evolution. Knowledge of our multifaceted desires and the costs and benefits of different strategies gives us the possibility of choosing from our wide-ranging mating menu.

Understanding why sexual strategies have evolved and the adaptive problems they were designed to solve provides a powerful fulcrum for changing behavior. Just because humans have physiological adaptations that cause us to grow calluses in response to repeated friction to the skin, for example, it is not inevitable that humans must develop calluses. We can and do create more friction-free environments. Similarly, knowing that jealousy functions to protect paternity for men and the commitment of a mate for women brings into focus the conditions most likely to trigger jealousy, such as cues to sexual and emotional infidelity. In principle, just as we can create environments that minimize friction, we can create jealousy-free relationships. Those who practice polyamory strive to do precisely that, and they sometimes succeed, although it would be naive to think that shutting down such strong emotional circuits is simple or easy.

Throughout this book I have used empirical studies of mating as the building blocks for a theory of human mating psychology. Although I have not hesitated to speculate when warranted, it is anchored in evidence. Now I will go beyond the scientific findings to describe what I see as their broader implications for social interactions in general, and for relations between men and women in particular.


