Adaptive Problems Leading to Breakups

Many mates in ancestral times became injured and died before old age. Men, for example, sustained wounds or were killed in combat between warring tribes. The paleontological record reveals fascinating evidence of aggression between men. Pieces of spears and knives have been found lodged in the remains of human rib cages. Injuries to skulls and ribs are found more frequently on male than on female skeletons, revealing that physical combat was primarily a male activity. Intriguingly, more injuries are located on the left sides of skulls and rib cages, suggesting a greater prevalence of right-handed attackers. The earliest known homicide victim in the paleontological record is a Neanderthal man who was stabbed in the chest by a right-hander roughly 50,000 years ago.4 These highly patterned injuries cannot be explained as accidents. They demonstrate that injury and death at the hands of other people have been recurrent hazards in human evolutionary history.

Traditional tribes today do not escape the damage done by male aggression. Among the Ache, for example, ritual club fights occur only among men, and they often result in permanent disabilities and death.5 A woman whose husband goes off to a club fight can never be sure that he will return unharmed. Among the Yanomamö, a boy does not achieve full status as a man until he has killed another man. Yanomamö men display their scars proudly, often painting them bright colors to draw attention to them.6 Men have fought in wars throughout human history, exposing themselves to grave risks.

Violence at the hands of other men was not the only way an ancestral man could die. Hunting has always been a male-dominated human enterprise, and ancestral men risked injury, particularly when hunting large game, such as wild boar, bison, or buffalo. Lions, panthers, and tigers roamed the African savanna, inflicting injury or death on the unwary, the unskilled, the imprudent, or the unlucky. Some men accidentally plunged off cliffs or fell from trees. In human ancestral environments, since a woman’s husband had a chance of dying first or becoming so seriously injured as to cripple his ability to hunt or to protect her, it would have been highly adaptive for her to assess and encourage alternative mates.

Ancestral women never warred and rarely hunted. Women’s gathering activities, which yielded 60 to 80 percent of the family’s food resources, were far less dangerous.7 Childbirth, however, took its toll. Without modern medical technology, many women failed to survive the dangerous journey of pregnancy and childbirth. A man left mateless by his wife’s death would have had to start the search and courting process from scratch, unless he had psychological adaptations that anticipated this possibility and caused him to lay the groundwork for securing a replacement. It would have paid for both men and women not to wait until their mate’s death to start evaluating potential alternatives.

Injury, disease, or the death of a mate were not the only hazards to force ancestral mates to look elsewhere. A woman’s husband could lose status within the group, be ostracized, become dominated by a rival male, prove to be a bad father, prove to be infertile, fail as a hunter, start abusing her, initiate affairs, direct resources to other women, or turn out to be sexually impotent. A man’s wife could fail at gathering food, mishandle family resources, prove to be a bad mother, prove to be infertile, decline his sexual advances, cheat on him, or get pregnant by another man. Either sex could contract debilitating diseases or become riddled with parasites. Life events sometimes take a terrible toll on a mate full of vitality when initially chosen. Once a selected spouse decreases in value, alternatives become attractive.

A mate’s decline in value and potential death represented only two of the conditions that might have diverted a person’s attention to alternatives. Another critical condition is an increase in one’s own desirability, which opens up an array of alternatives that were previously unobtainable. A man, for example, could sometimes dramatically elevate his status by performing an unusually brave deed, such as killing a large animal, defeating another man in combat, or saving someone’s child from harm. Sudden increases in a man’s status opened up new mating possibilities with younger, more attractive mates or multiple mates, who could make a current mate pale by comparison. Mating options mushroomed for men who managed to boost their status. Because a woman’s value as a mate was closely tied with her reproductive value, she usually could not elevate her desirability to the same extent that men could. Nevertheless, women could improve their mate value by acquiring status or power, showing unusual adeptness at dealing with crises, displaying exceptional wisdom, or having sons, daughters, or other kin who achieved elevated positions within the group. These possibilities for changes in mating value are still with us today.

Another important impetus to break up a mateship was the presence of more desirable alternatives. A desirable mate who had previously been taken could suddenly become available. A previously uninterested person could develop a strong attraction. A member of a neighboring tribe could appear on the scene. And any of these people could be sufficiently desirable to warrant breaking an existing marital bond.

In sum, three major general circumstances could have led an ancestral person to leave a long-term mate: when a current mate became less desirable because of a decrease in abilities or resources or a failure to provide the reproductively relevant resources expected in the initial selection; when the person experienced an increase in his or her own resources or reputation that opened up previously unobtainable mating possibilities; and when compelling alternatives became available. Because these three conditions are likely to have regularly recurred among our ancestors, it is reasonable to expect that humans evolved psychological mechanisms to evaluate the costs and benefits of existing relationships in comparison with the perceived alternatives. These adaptations would have been attuned to changes in the value of a mate, continued to identify and gauge mating alternatives, and led to the pursuit of backup mates or potential replacement mates.


