Changes in Sexual Desire

One of the most prominent changes within marriage over time occurs in the realm of sex. Among newlywed couples, with each passing year men increasingly complain that their wives withhold sex. Although only 14 percent of men complain that their newlywed brides have refused to have sex during the first year of marriage, 43 percent express this feeling four years later. Women’s complaints that their husbands refuse to have sex with them increase from 4 percent in the first year to 18 percent in the fifth year. Both men and women increasingly charge their partner with refusing sex, although more than twice as many men as women voice this complaint.7

One indication of the lower sexual involvement of married people over time is the decline in the frequency of intercourse. When married women are less than nineteen years old, intercourse occurs roughly eleven or twelve times per month.8 By age thirty, this frequency drops to nine times per month, and by age forty-two to six times per month, or half the frequency of married women half their age. Past age fifty, the average frequency of intercourse among married couples drops to once a week. These results may reflect a lessened interest by women, by men, or most likely by both.

Another indication of reduced sexual involvement with age comes from a Gallup poll that measured the extent of sexual satisfaction and the frequency of sexual intercourse over time among married couples.9 The percentage of couples having intercourse at least once a week declined from nearly 80 percent at age thirty to roughly 40 percent by age sixty. Sexual satisfaction showed a similar decline. Nearly 40 percent of the couples reported “very great satisfaction” with their sex lives at age thirty, but only 20 percent voiced this level of satisfaction by age sixty.

The arrival of a baby has a significant impact on the frequency of sex. In one study, twenty-one couples kept daily records of the frequency of intercourse over a period of three years, starting with the first day of marriage.10 The rates of intercourse a year after the marriage were half what they had been during the first month. The arrival of a baby depressed the frequency of sex even more: after the birth, the rate of intercourse averaged about one-third of what it had been during the first month of marriage. Although more extensive studies over longer time periods are needed to confirm this finding, it suggests that the birth of a baby has a long-lasting effect on marital sex, as mating effort shifts to parental effort.

The effect of the length of a marriage on sexual intercourse appears to be influenced by a woman’s physical appearance. According to a study of more than 1,500 married individuals, men and women respond differently to the normal changes in physical appearance that accompany aging.11 As women age, husbands show less sexual interest in them and experience less happiness with their sexual relationship. Men who perceive their wives as quite attractive, however, maintain high frequencies of sex and higher levels of sexual satisfaction. Other research confirms that after the early years of marriage, husbands lose more sexual interest in their wives than wives do in their husbands.12 Although it is somewhat of a cliché that men want sex more than their partners do, over time this gender difference sometimes flips. These changes may be more a function of the length of the relationship than of age per se. Switching to a new mate typically brings a resurgence of sexual desire.


