Menopause—The Last Tick of the Biological Clock

A woman’s capacity for reproduction reaches zero when menopause is complete. One of the extraordinary facts about women’s lifetime development is that menopause occurs so long before life is over. Reproduction completely ends for most women by the time they reach fifty, even though many women live well into their seventies, eighties, or nineties. This situation contrasts sharply with that of all other primate species. Even in long-lived mammals, the post-reproductive phase for females represents only 10 percent or less of their total life span. Only 5 percent of elephants, for example, reach age fifty-five, but female fertility at that age is still 50 percent of the maximum observed at the peak of fertility.33

Other female functions decline gradually with age. Heart and lung efficiency, for example, is nearly 100 percent of capacity in the early twenties but declines to only 80 percent by the age of fifty.34 In contrast, fertility peaks in the midtwenties but is close to 0 percent by the time a woman reaches fifty. The steep decline in women’s fertility, in contrast to all other bodily functions, calls out for an explanation.

At one point in history, women themselves were blamed for menopause, owing to “many excesses introduced by luxury, and the irregularities of the passions.”35 Most people today see that as a sexist and antiquated notion. One current theory to account for the puzzling phenomenon of menopause is that women’s post-reproductive phase has been artificially lengthened as a result of better nutrition and health care. According to this view, our human ancestors would have rarely lived long past menopause, if they reached it at all. This explanation appears highly unlikely, however, because the increase in the average human life span is due mainly to a decline in infant mortality. Ancestral people who lived to age twenty typically enjoyed a maximum life span close to our own, or roughly seventy to eighty years. Indeed, there is little evidence that medical technology has altered the maximum lifetime of humans at all.36 The view that menopause is an incidental by-product of longer lives also cannot explain why women’s reproductive function declines so sharply, whereas all of women’s other vital capacities decline gradually, as if they were designed for a longer lifetime. Selection would be unlikely to favor efficient body functions into the fifties and sixties if ancestral humans did not live beyond fifty. Moreover, the longer-life view cannot explain the differences between the sexes whereby men’s fertility fades only gradually, while women’s declines precipitously.37

A more likely explanation for women’s long post-reproductive phase is that menopause is a female adaptation that prompts the shift from mating and direct reproduction to parenting, grandparenting, and other forms of investing in kin. This explanation, often called the grandmother hypothesis, depends on the assumption that continuing to produce children would actually have interfered with an ancestral woman’s reproductive success compared to investing in her existing children, grandchildren, and other genetic relatives. It also assumes that older women would have been particularly valuable to their children and grandchildren. Older women, for example, tend to acquire wisdom and knowledge about health practices, kin relations, and stress management that younger women may lack. They also tend to increase their control over resources and their ability to influence other people. These increased powers and skills can be channeled toward children, grandchildren, and the entire extended network of a woman’s genetic clan.38

One early test of the grandmother hypothesis among the Ache of Paraguay suggested that, for this group, the reproductive benefits provided by the shift from direct reproduction to grandparental investment may not be great enough to outweigh the reproductive costs to women of their lost capacity to produce children directly.39 More recent tests show a bit more promising support for the grandmother hypothesis. A study of traditional Gambians found that the presence of maternal grandmothers, but not paternal grandmothers, increased a grandchild’s survival for the first two years of life.40 A study of eighteenth- and nineteenth-century Finnish peoples found that the longer the postmenopausal phase of a woman’s life, the higher the probability that her grandchildren would survive.41

Another hypothesis for women’s menopause is that there is a trade-off between rapid reproduction relatively early in life and more extended reproduction over the life span. Producing many high-quality children early may in effect wear out a woman’s reproductive machinery, so that menopause is not in itself an adaptation but rather an incidental by-product of early and rapid breeding.42 In this view, it becomes critical to identify the conditions that would have allowed ancestral women the opportunity to reproduce early and rapidly.

Early reproduction and births at short intervals, or at three to four years on average, may occur in women because ancestral women could often rely on food and protection offered by an investing mate. The tremendous parental resources that men channel to their children and mates may have created the favorable conditions for early and rapid reproduction. Chimpanzee and gorilla females, in contrast, must do all the provisioning by themselves and so cannot space offspring so closely. In these species, females space out their reproduction over nearly all of their adult lives by having one birth every five or six years. The change in women’s lives that produces a cessation of direct reproduction and a shift to investing in genetic relatives may therefore be directly linked to the high levels of parental investment by men. Since men’s investment can be traced, in turn, to the active choosing by women of men who show the ability and willingness to invest, the reproductive changes that occur over women’s lives are intimately linked with the mating decisions that occur between the sexes.


