Replacing a Mate

Not all mates gained can be retained. Nor should they be. Sometimes there are compelling reasons to get rid of a mate, such as when a mate stops providing support, withdraws sex, or becomes physically or psychologically abusive. Those who remain with a mate through economic hardship, sexual infidelity, and cruelty may win our admiration for their loyalty today. But staying with a bad mate generally would not have helped ancestral humans to survive and reproduce successfully. We are the descendants of those who knew when to cut their losses.

Getting rid of a mate has precedent in the animal world. Ring doves, for example, are generally monogamous from one breeding season to the next, but they break up under certain circumstances. The doves experience a divorce rate of about 25 percent every season. The major reason for breaking their bond is infertility.12 When ring doves fail to produce chicks with one partner during a breeding season, they leave the mate and search for another. Breaking up with an infertile mate aids the reproduction of ring doves, while remaining in a barren union does not.

Just as we have evolved sexual strategies to select, attract, and keep a good mate, we have also evolved strategies for jettisoning a bad mate. Divorce occurs in all known human cultures.13 Our separation or “mate ejection” strategies involve a variety of psychological mechanisms. We assess whether the costs inflicted by a mate outweigh the benefits provided. We size up other potential partners and evaluate whether they might offer more than our current mate. We gauge the likelihood of successfully attracting more desirable partners. We calculate the potential damage that might be caused to ourselves, our children, and our kin by the breakup. And we combine all this information into a decision to stay or leave.

Once a mate decides to leave, another set of psychological adaptations is activated. Because these decisions have complex consequences for two sets of extended kin who often have keen interests in the union, breaking up is neither simple nor effortless. Complex social relationships must be negotiated and the breakup justified. The range of tactical options within the human repertoire is enormous, from simply packing one’s bags and walking away to provoking a rift by revealing an infidelity. There are indeed at least fifty ways to leave a lover.

Breaking up is a solution to the problem of a bad mate, but it opens up the new problem of replacing that mate. Like most mammals, humans typically do not mate with a single person for an entire lifetime. Humans often reenter the mating market and repeat the cycle of selection, attraction, and retention. But starting over after a breakup poses its own unique problems. People reenter the mating market at a different age and with different assets and liabilities. Increased status and resources may help a person to attract a mate who was previously out of range. Alternatively, older age, the presence of children, or psychological baggage from a previous mateship may detract from a person’s ability to attract a new mate.

Men and women undergo predictably different changes as they divorce and reenter the mating market. If there are children, women often take primary responsibility for child rearing, although this may be changing as some men step up to the plate. Because children from previous unions are usually seen as burdens rather than benefits when it comes to mating, a woman’s ability to attract a desirable mate often suffers more than a man’s. Consequently, fewer divorced women than men remarry, and this disparity gets larger with increasing age. This book documents the changing patterns of human mating over a lifetime and identifies circumstances that affect the likelihood of remating for men and women.


