Media Effects on Standards

Advertisers exploit the universal appeal of beautiful, youthful women. Some argue that the media and Madison Avenue construct a single, arbitrary standard of beauty that everyone must live up to.49 Advertisements are thought to convey unnatural, photoshopped images of beauty and to tell people to strive to embody those images. This interpretation may be partially true, particularly when it comes to depicting unnaturally thin female models, but it is also at least partially false. Standards of beauty are not arbitrary but rather embody reliable cues to reproductive value. Advertisers have no special interest in inculcating a particular set of beauty standards; they do want to use whatever sells products. Advertisers perch a clear-skinned, regular-featured young woman on the hood of the latest-model car, or gather several attractive young women to stare fondly at a man drinking a brand-name beer, because these images exploit men’s evolved psychological mechanisms and therefore sell cars and beer, not because advertisers want to promulgate a single standard of beauty.

The media images with which we are bombarded daily, however, have a potentially damaging consequence. In one study, after groups of men looked at photographs of either highly attractive women or women of average attractiveness, they evaluated their commitment to their current romantic partner.50 The men who had viewed pictures of attractive women thereafter judged their actual partner to be less attractive than did the men who had viewed analogous pictures of women who were average in attractiveness. Perhaps more important, the men who had viewed attractive women thereafter rated themselves as less committed to, less satisfied with, less serious about, and less close to their actual partners. Parallel results were obtained in another study in which men viewed physically attractive nude centerfolds—they rated themselves as less attracted to their partners.51

The reason for these changes is found in the unrealistic nature of the images. The few attractive women selected for advertisements are chosen from thousands of applicants. In many cases, literally thousands of pictures are taken of a chosen woman. Playboy, for example, was reputed to shoot roughly 6,000 pictures for its centerfold each month. From thousands of pictures, a few are selected for advertisements and centerfolds. And then those images are photoshopped. So what men see are the most attractive women in their most attractive poses with the most attractive background in the most attractive photoshopped images. Contrast these photographs with what ancestral man would have witnessed, living in a band of no more than 150 individuals. It is doubtful that he would see hundreds or even dozens of attractive women in that environment. If there were plenty of attractive fertile women, however, he might reasonably consider switching mates and decreasing his commitment to his existing mate.

We carry with us the same evaluative mechanisms that evolved in ancient times. Now, however, these psychological adaptations are artificially stimulated by the dozens of attractive women whose images men witness daily in our visually saturated culture on the Internet, in magazines, on billboards, on television, and in movies. These images do not represent real women in our actual social environment. Rather, they hijack adaptations designed for a different mating environment. They sometimes create unhappiness by interfering with existing real-life relationships. The ability to scroll through thousands of potential mates on Internet dating sites and apps such as Tinder, Match.com, and OKCupid may trick our psychology of mating into thinking that there is always someone better out there if only we can swipe or click through enough options.

As a consequence of viewing these images, men become dissatisfied and less committed to their mates. The potential damage inflicted by these images affects women as well, because they create a spiraling and unhealthy competition among women to embody the images they see daily—images of women who presumably are desired by men, but in actuality are much thinner than most men really find attractive. The unprecedented rates of eating disorders, such as anorexia nervosa, and cosmetic surgery, such as tummy tucks and breast enlargement, may stem in part from these media images; some women go to extreme lengths to fulfill what they perceive to be men’s desires. But the images do not cause this unfortunate result by creating standards of beauty that were previously absent. Rather, they work by exploiting men’s existing evolved standards of beauty and women’s competitive mating mechanisms on an unprecedented and unhealthy scale.

Facial and bodily beauty, as important as they are in men’s mating preferences, solve for men only one set of adaptive problems—identifying and becoming sexually aroused by women who show signs of fertility. Selecting a reproductively valuable woman, however, provides no guarantee that her value will be monopolized exclusively by one man. The next critical adaptive problem is to ensure paternity.


