Cost-Inflicting Mate Retention Tactics

Another mate retention tactic is to inflict costs on competitors or on mates through derogation, threats, and violence. These contrast sharply with benefit-conferring tactics such as providing resources or bestowing love and kindness. Destructive tactics acquire their effectiveness by deterring interlopers from poaching and deterring mates from straying.

One set of these cost-inflicting tactics is aimed at rivals. Verbal denigration of competitors is perhaps the mildest form of this tactic, although in Ecclesiasticus (28:17) it is noted that “the blow of a whip raises a welt, but a blow of the tongue crushes the bones.” To dissuade their mates from becoming attracted to a rival, both men and women may belittle the rival’s appearance or intelligence or start damaging rumors about him or her. Derogation of competitors continues even after vows of undying commitment are taken, because mate switching is always a possibility. When used judiciously, it is an effective method for rendering rivals less attractive and lowers the odds of a mate’s defection.

A costlier tactic is subjecting a rival to verbal threats and violence. Just as chimpanzees bare their teeth in a threat that sends rivals scurrying from a female, newlywed men yell at rivals who look at their bride, threaten to strike those who make passes at her, and stare coldly at men who look too long at her. These threatening retention tactics are performed almost exclusively by men. Although they are not performed often, we discovered that 46 percent of married men had threatened an intrasexual competitor within the past year, whereas only 11 percent of the married women had done so. These tactics convey strong signals that mate poaching attempts come with large risks.

Men sometimes inflict even more extreme costs on their rivals. Married men may hit men who make passes at their wives, get their friends to beat up a rival, slap men who show too much interest in their wives, or vandalize their property. These acts impose heavy costs in the form of bodily injury or, in rare cases, death. The reputation that these acts earn for their perpetrator deters other men. Most men would think twice before flirting with the girlfriend of a large, rough-looking, burly man with a reputation for hair-trigger violence.

Another set of cost-inflicting tactics are sometimes directed at mates to deter them from straying. Male baboons and other primates wound females through bites or beatings when they consort with other males.50 Married men and women become angry when their partner flirts with others, yell if the partner flirts, and threaten to break up if their partner ever cheats. Men perceived by their partner as lower in mate value are especially likely to verbally insult her, possibly because these men, with fewer benefits to bestow, are trying to reduce her perception that she is the more desirable partner.51 Moreover, both genders sometimes threaten never to speak with their partner again if they catch the partner with someone else. Occasionally they hit their partner when he or she flirts with others. Men in committed dating relationships and men who are married inflict these costs nearly twice as often as men who do not expect to be with their current mate in the future.

Punishing a mate who shows signs of interest in others acquires its effectiveness from the deterrent value of the threatened costs. Some of these costs are physical, such as bodily injury. Other costs are psychological, such as the lowered self-esteem that comes from being yelled at or otherwise verbally abused.52 Since a person’s self-esteem is, in part, an internal tracking device reflecting self-perceived mate value, these forms of abuse may be functional in mate retention, however morally abhorrent they are.

Clues to the functionality of partner abuse come from the specific contexts in which it is deployed.53 One circumstance is the perception or discovery of sexual infidelity. A second is when there exists a mate value discrepancy: the less desirable partner may abuse the other to reduce that partner’s perceptions of the discrepancy. A third is when a woman is pregnant and the man suspects that the child might not be his. Blows in this circumstance are often directed to the woman’s abdomen, suggesting the disturbing possibility that the function of this form of violence is to abort a rival’s child.

These vicious sorts of spousal abuse are seen across cultures. Studies of the Baiga, for example, reveal cases in which husbands have attacked their wives with blazing logs as punishment for flirting with another man, a form of violence against women in which jealousy is the key motive.54 In studies of abused women in Canada, 55 percent of the women reported that jealousy was one of the reasons for their husband’s assault on them; half of the women who reported jealousy as a motive acknowledged that their sexual infidelity had provoked the violence.55

Brutal beatings occur not just after an infidelity is suspected but to prevent its occurrence. Moreover, several culturally created means have been developed to prevent extramarital sexual activity through genital mutilation in various cultures across northern and central Africa, Arabia, Indonesia, and Malaysia. Clitoridectomy, the surgical removal of the clitoris to prevent a woman from experiencing sexual pleasure, is practiced on millions of African women. Another practice common in Africa is infibulation, the sewing shut of the labia majora. According to one estimate, 200 million women living today in twenty-three countries in northern and central Africa have been genitally mutilated through infibulation.56

Infibulation effectively prevents sexual intercourse. It is sometimes performed by the woman’s kin as a guarantee to a potential husband that the bride is virginal. After marriage, infibulated women must be cut open to allow for sexual intercourse. If the husband goes away for a while, his wife may be reinfibulated. In the Sudan, the woman is reinfibulated after she bears a child and then must be reopened to allow for intercourse. Although the decision to reinfibulate a woman usually rests with her husband, some women demand reinfibulation after delivery, in the belief that it increases the husband’s pleasure. A Sudanese woman who fails to please her husband risks being divorced, thus losing her children, losing economic support, and bringing disgrace on her entire family.57

There are no cultures in which men are not sexually jealous. In every supposedly nonjealous culture previously thought to contain no barriers to sexual conduct beyond the incest taboo, evidence for sexual jealousy has now been found. The Marquesa Islanders, for example, were once thought to impose no formal or informal prohibitions on adultery. This notion is contradicted by the ethnographic report: “When a woman undertook to live with a man, she placed herself under his authority. If she cohabited with another man without his permission, she was beaten or, if her husband’s jealousy was sufficiently aroused, killed.”58

Another presumed example of the absence of sexual jealousy is the Inuit, a culture that practices wife sharing. Contrary to popular myth, however, male sexual jealousy is a leading cause of spousal homicide among the Inuit, and these homicides occur at an alarmingly high rate.59 Inuit men share their wives only under highly circumscribed conditions, such as when there is a reciprocal expectation that the favor will be returned in kind. Wife swapping apparently can mitigate the onset of men’s jealousy. All of these findings demonstrate that there are no paradises populated with sexually liberated people who share mates freely and do not get jealous.

Some societies require the mate poacher to pay reparation to the husband when he is caught having intercourse with the wife. Even in the United States, monetary payments to the husband have been imposed on mate poachers for “alienation of affection.” In North Carolina, for example, an ophthalmologist was required to pay a woman’s ex-husband $200,000 for having enticed her away from him. These legal strictures reflect an intuitive understanding of human evolutionary psychology: in men’s eyes, cuckoldry represents the unlawful stealing of another’s resources. When it comes to sex, men everywhere seem to regard wives as “theirs” to be owned and controlled. Men react to cuckoldry as they would to theft and sometimes leave a trail of destruction in their wake.60


