The Closing Time Effect and the Post-Orgasm Shift

Another psychological clue to men’s strategy of casual sex comes from studies that examine shifts in men’s judgments of attractiveness over the course of an evening at a singles bar. In one study, 137 men and 80 women were approached at 9:00 p.m., 10:30, and 12:00 midnight and asked to rate the attractiveness of members of the opposite sex in the bar using a 10-point scale.43 As closing time approached, men viewed women as increasingly attractive. The judgments at 9:00 were 5.5, but by midnight they had increased to over 6.5. Women’s judgments of men’s attractiveness also increased over time. But women’s ratings overall of the male bar patrons were lower than men’s ratings of women. At 9:00, women rated the men at the bar as just below the average of 5.0, which increased near midnight to only 5.5.

Men’s shift in perceptions of women’s attractiveness near closing time occurs regardless of how much alcohol they have consumed. Whether a man has consumed a single drink or six drinks has no effect on the shift in his view of women as more attractive near closing time. The often noted “beer goggles” phenomenon, whereby women presumably are viewed as more attractive with men’s increasing intoxication, may instead be attributable to a psychological mechanism sensitive to decreasing opportunities for sexual success. As the evening progresses and a man has not yet been successful in picking up a woman, he views the remaining women in the bar as increasingly attractive, a shift that should increase his motivation to seek sex from the remaining women in the bar.

Another perceptual shift may take place after men have an orgasm with a casual sex partner with whom they wish no further involvement. Some men report viewing a sex partner as highly attractive before orgasm, but then after orgasm, a mere ten seconds later, viewing her as less attractive or even unappealing. Martie Haselton and I found that these shifts occur primarily among men who are dispositionally inclined to pursue a short-term mating strategy.44 They do not occur for long-term-oriented men, and they do not occur for women regardless of mating strategy. The negative shift in attraction following orgasm may function to prompt a hasty postcopulatory departure to reduce risks to the man such as getting involved in an unwanted commitment.


