The Evolutionary Arms Race

Conflicts between men and women pervade their interactions on the mating market, in the workplace, and within relationships. These range from conflicts over sexual access in dating couples to fights over commitment and investment among married couples, to sexual harassment in the workplace, date rape, and warfare rape. Even taking into account the many scientific questions that still remain about how best to explain rape, most sexual conflicts have their origins in men’s and women’s evolved mating strategies. The strategies pursued by members of one sex often interfere with those of the other sex as each tries to influence the other toward gender-linked mating goals.

Both genders have psychological adaptations, such as anger, sadness, and jealousy, that alert them to interference with their mating strategies. A woman’s anger is evoked most intensely in the specific contexts in which a man interferes with her mating strategies—for example, if he acts in condescending, abusive, controlling, or sexually coercive ways toward her, constricting her personal power or freedom of choice. A man’s anger is most intensely evoked when a woman interferes with his mating strategies, for example, by spurning his advances, refusing to have sex with him, or hooking up with another man.

These battles create spiraling arms races over evolutionary time. For every incremental gain in men’s ability to deceive women, women evolve comparable incremental gains in their ability to detect deception. Better abilities to detect deception, in turn, create the evolutionary conditions for the other sex to develop increasingly subtle forms of deception. For each escalating test that women impose on men to gauge the depth of their commitment, men develop increasingly more elaborate strategies to mimic or minimize commitment. This development in turn favors more refined and subtle tests by women to weed out the pretenders. And for every form of abuse inflicted by one sex on the other, the other evolves methods for circumventing the manipulations. As women evolve better and more sophisticated strategies to achieve their mating goals, men evolve increasingly sophisticated strategies to achieve theirs. Because the mating goals of the sexes interfere with each other within evolutionarily delimited domains, there is no evolutionary end to the spiral.

Adaptive emotions such as anger and psychological pain, however, help women and men reduce the costs they incur when someone attempts to interfere with their mating strategies. In the context of dating or marriage, these emotions sometimes lead to the end of the relationship.





