Costs of Casual Sex

All sexual strategies carry costs, and casual sex is no exception. Men risk contracting sexually transmitted diseases, acquiring a reputation as a womanizer or “man-whore,” or suffering injury from a jealous husband. A significant proportion of murders across cultures occur because jealous men suspect their mates of infidelity.71 Unfaithful married men risk retaliatory affairs by their wives and costly divorces. Short-term sexual strategies also take time, energy, and economic resources.

Women sometimes incur more severe costs than men do. Women risk impairing their desirability if they develop a reputation for promiscuity, since men prize fidelity in a potential long-term mate. Women known as promiscuous suffer reputational damage even in relatively promiscuous cultures, such as among the Swedes and the Ache Indians.72 A woman who adopts an exclusively short-term sexual strategy is at greater risk of physical and sexual abuse. Although women in marriages are also subjected to battering and even rape by husbands, the alarming statistics on the incidence of date rape, which some estimate to be 15 or 20 percent of all college women, reveal that women who are not in long-term relationships are at considerable risk.73 Mate preferences, if judiciously applied to avoid potentially dangerous men, can minimize these risks.

Unmarried women who pursue casual sex risk getting pregnant and bearing a child without the benefits of an investing partner. In ancestral times, these children would have been at much greater risk of disease, injury, and death.74 Some women commit infanticide in the absence of an investing man. In Canada, for example, single women delivered only 12 percent of the babies born between 1977 and 1983, but they committed just over 50 percent of the sixty-four maternal infanticides reported to the police.75 This trend occurs across cultures as well, such as among the Baganda of Africa. But even this solution does not cancel the substantial other costs that women incur: nine months of gestation, reputational damage, and lost mating opportunities.

An unfaithful married woman risks the withdrawal of resources by her husband. From a reproductive perspective, she may be wasting valuable time in an extramarital liaison, obtaining sperm that are unnecessary for reproduction.76 Furthermore, she risks increasing the sibling competition among her children, who may have weaker ties because they were fathered by different men.77

Short-term mating, in short, poses hazards for both sexes. But because there are powerful benefits as well, women and men have evolved psychological mechanisms to select circumstances in which the costs of short-term mating are minimized and the benefits increased.


