Casual Sex as a Source of Power

Historically, the scientific study of mating has focused nearly exclusively on marriage. Human anatomy, physiology, psychology, and behavior, however, betray an ancestral past filled with opportunistic sex and affairs. The obvious reproductive advantages of such affairs to men may have blinded scientists to the benefits they had for women as well. Affairs involve willing women. Willing women seek or require benefits.

This picture of human nature may be disturbing to some. Women may not be comforted by the ease with which men are sometimes willing to jump into bed with near-strangers. Men may not be comforted by the knowledge that their partners continue to scan the mating terrain, encourage other men by flirting, offer hints of sexual accessibility, cultivate backup mates, and sometimes cheat with impunity. Human nature can be alarming.

But viewed from another perspective, our possession of a complex repertoire of mating strategies gives us far more power, far more flexibility, and far more control of our own destiny. We choose from a large mating menu and are not doomed to a single, invariant strategy. We tailor our mating strategies to our circumstances, be they an environment characterized by a sex ratio imbalance or a return entry into the mating market after a breakup. Moreover, the rapid rise of Internet dating sites and mobile apps greatly expands the pool of potential mates, providing access to thousands of potential partners we would never otherwise encounter in our day-to-day lives.

Modern technology and contemporary living conditions also allow people to escape many of the costs of casual sex that our ancestors experienced. Effective birth control, for example, allows us to avoid the costs of an unwanted or ill-timed pregnancy. The relative anonymity of urban living diminishes the reputational damage incurred by casual sex. Geographic mobility lowers the often restrictive influence of parents on the mating decisions of their children. And government safety nets lower the risks to survival for children produced by short-term liaisons. These reduced costs foster a fuller expression of the range of human mating within our complex repertoire.

Acknowledging the full diversity of our mating strategies may violate our socialized conceptions of one-and-only bliss. But simultaneously, this knowledge gives us greater power to design our own mating destiny than any humans in our evolutionary past ever possessed.





