Mate Switching and Backup Mates

Through casual sex, women may also secure added protection against conflicts that arise with other men or with competitors. Having a second mate who will defend and protect her may be especially advantageous for women in societies where they are at considerable risk of attack or rape. In some societies, such as the Yanomamö of Venezuela, women are vulnerable to male violence, including physical abuse, rape, and even the killing of their children, when they lack the protection of a mate.58 This vulnerability is illustrated by the account of a Brazilian woman who was kidnapped by Yanomamö men.59 When men from another village tried to rape her, not a single Yanomamö man came to her defense because she was not married to any of them and had no special male friends to protect her.

The use of such special friendships for protection has a primate precedent among savanna baboons.60 Female baboons form special friendships with one or more males other than their primary mates, and these friends protect them against sexual harassment from other males. Females show a marked preference for mating with their friends when they enter estrus, suggesting a strategy of exchanging sex for protection. As Robert Smith points out:

A primary mate cannot always be available to defend his wife and children and, in his absence, it may be advantageous for a female to consort with another male for the protection he may offer. . . . Absence of the primary mate [for example, when he is off hunting] may create the opportunity and need for extrabond mating. . . . A male may be inclined to protect the children of a married lover on the chance that his genes are represented among them.61

A lover may also serve as a potential replacement for a woman’s regular mate if he should desert, become ill or injured, prove to be infertile, or die, which were not unusual events in ancestral environments. Her regular mate might fail to return from the hunt, for example, or be killed in a tribal war. Men’s status might change over time—for instance, a woman married to a head man who is deposed, whose position is usurped, and whose resources are co-opted might benefit by positioning herself to replace him quickly, without having to start over again. A woman who must delay replacing her mate by starting over is forced to incur the costs of a new search for a mate while her own desirability declines. Women benefit from having other men as potential backup mates.

The mate-switching function has been observed in the spotted sandpiper (Actitis macularia), a polyandrous shorebird studied on Little Pelican Island in Leech Lake, Minnesota. The biologists Mark Colwell and Lewis Oring, through 4,000 hours of field observation, discovered that a female spotted sandpiper who engages in extra-pair copulations with another male has an increased likelihood of becoming an enduring mate with that male in the future.62 The females use the copulation as a way to test the receptivity and availability of the male. Male spotted sandpipers, however, sometimes foil these attempts at mate switching. Some males move several territories away from their home base when seeking extra-pair copulations, apparently so that the female will not detect that they are already mated. Despite this conflict between the sexes, the fact that the adulterers often end up as committed mates suggests that the extra-pair matings function as a means to switch mates.

Evidence for the mate-switching function of casual sex in humans comes from several sources. Women tend to have affairs when they are unhappy with their primary relationship, whereas men who have affairs are no less happy with their marriages than men who refrain.63 Heidi Greiling and I conducted the second study, which revealed that women sometimes have affairs when they are trying to replace their current mate or in order to make it easier to break off with a current mate.64

Casual sex partners sometimes bestow elevated status on their temporary mates. Women sometimes elevate their status by mating with a prestigious man, even if it is just an affair. In the economics of the mating marketplace, people assume that the woman must be special, since prestigious men generally have their pick of the most desirable women. Women may gain access to a higher social stratum, from which they might secure a permanent mate. Women also can elevate their status within their own social circles and potentially secure a more desirable husband.


