Men’s Status and Women’s Beauty

Men value a woman’s attractiveness for reasons other than her reproductive value. The consequences of women’s attractiveness for a man’s social status are critical. Everyday folklore tells us that our mate is a reflection of ourselves. Men are particularly concerned about status, reputation, and hierarchies because elevated rank has always been an important means of acquiring the resources that make men attractive to women. It is reasonable, therefore, to expect that a man will be concerned about the effect that his mate has on his social status—an effect that has consequences for gaining additional resources and mating opportunities.

A person’s status and resource holdings, however, often cannot be observed directly. They must instead be inferred from tangible characteristics. Among humans, one set of cues is people’s ornamentation. Gold chains, expensive artwork, or fancy cars may signal to both sexes an abundance of resources that could be directed toward parental investment.35 Men seek attractive women as mates not simply for their reproductive value but also as signals of status to same-sex competitors and to other potential mates.36

Experiments have documented the influence of attractive mates on men’s social status. When shown photographs of unattractive men paired with attractive spouses, people attribute status and professional prestige to those men more than in other pairings, such as attractive men with unattractive women, unattractive women with unattractive men, and even attractive men with attractive women. People suspect that an unattractive man must have high status if he can interest a stunning woman, presumably because people know that attractive women have high mate value and usually can get what they want.

In my study of human prestige criteria, dating someone who is physically attractive greatly increases a man’s status, whereas it increases a woman’s status only somewhat.37 In contrast, a man who dates an unattractive woman experiences a moderate decrease in status, whereas a woman who dates an unattractive man experiences only a trivial decrease in status.

These trends occur across cultures. When my research collaborators and I surveyed native residents of China, Poland, Guam, Romania, Russia, and Germany in parallel studies of human prestige criteria, we found that in each of these countries, acquiring a physically attractive mate enhances a man’s status more than a woman’s. In each country, having an unattractive mate hurts a man’s status more than it does a woman’s. Men across cultures today value attractive women not only because attractiveness signals a woman’s reproductive capacity but also because it signals status, and status, in turn, creates more mating opportunities.


