Sexual Assault

Rape may be defined as the use of force, or the threat to use force, to obtain sex. Estimates of the number of women who have been raped vary, depending on how inclusive a definition the researcher uses. Some researchers use broad definitions that include instances in which a woman did not perceive that she was raped at the time but admitted later that she did not really want to have intercourse or regretted doing so. Other researchers use stricter definitions that delimit rape to clear cases of forced intercourse against the woman’s will. One large-scale study of 2,016 university women, for example, found that 6 percent had been raped.51 Another study found, however, that almost 15 percent of 380 college women had been involved in sexual intercourse against their will.52 Given the large social stigma attached to victims and the well-known underreporting of rape, these figures probably underestimate the actual numbers of women who have been raped.

The issue of rape has a bearing on human mating strategies, in part because many rapes occur within the context of mating relationships. Dating is a common context for rape. One study found that almost 15 percent of college women had experienced unwanted sexual intercourse in a dating encounter.53 Another study found that, for 63 percent of 347 women, all instances of sexual victimization were perpetrated by dates, lovers, husbands, or de facto partners.54 The most extensive study of rape in marriage found that of nearly 1,000 married women, 14 percent had been raped by their husband.55 Rape in the modern world often does not fit the stereotype of a menacing stranger jumping out of a dark alley.

Men are almost invariably the perpetrators of rape, and most victims are women, although victims also include children and men. It is a matter of controversy within the scientific community whether rape represents an evolved sexual strategy of men or is better understood as a horrifying side effect of men’s general sexual strategy of seeking low-cost casual sex.56 Among scorpionflies, however, the evidence for rape as an evolved strategy is strong. The males have a special anatomical clamp that functions solely in the context of raping a female and not in consensual mating, for which a male offers a nuptial gift.57 Experiments that seal the clamp with wax prevent the male from achieving a forced copulation. Scorpionflies have rape adaptations, but what about humans?


