—DETECTIVE IN THE FILM Blood Simple

AMONG THE CHIMPANZEES at the large zoo colony in Arnhem, the Netherlands, Yeroen reigned as the dominant adult male.1 He walked in an exaggeratedly heavy manner, and he looked larger than he really was. Only occasionally did he need to demonstrate his dominance, raising his hair on end and running full speed at the other apes, who scattered in all directions at his charge. Yeroen’s dominance extended to sex. Although there were four adult males in the troop, Yeroen was responsible for nearly 75 percent of all matings when the females came into estrus.

As Yeroen grew older, however, things began to change. A younger male, Luit, experienced a sudden growth spurt and started to challenge Yeroen’s status. Luit gradually stopped displaying the submissive greeting to Yeroen, brazenly showing his fearlessness. Once, Luit approached Yeroen and smacked him hard, and another time Luit used his potentially lethal canines to draw blood. Most of the time, however, the battles were more symbolic, with threats and bluffs in the place of bloodshed. Initially, all the females sided with Yeroen, allowing him to maintain his status. One by one they defected to Luit, however, as the tide turned. After two months, the transition was complete. Yeroen was dethroned and began displaying the submissive greeting to Luit. Mating changes followed. While Luit achieved only 25 percent of the matings during Yeroen’s reign of power, his sexual access doubled to 50 percent when he took over. Yeroen’s sexual access to females dropped to zero.

Although ousted from power and lacking sexual access, Yeroen’s life was not over. Gradually, he formed an alliance with an upcoming male named Nikkie. Although neither Yeroen nor Nikkie dared to challenge Luit alone, together they made a formidable coalition. Over several weeks, they grew bolder in challenging Luit. Eventually, a physical fight erupted. Although all the chimpanzees involved sustained injuries, the alliance of Nikkie and Yeroen triumphed. Following this victory, Nikkie secured 50 percent of the matings, and Yeroen, because of his friendship with Nikkie, now enjoyed 25 percent of the matings. His banishment from females had been temporary. Although he never again regained the top alpha position, he had rallied from the setback sufficiently to remain a contender in the troop.

With humans as with chimpanzees, nothing in mating remains static over a lifetime. An individual’s value as a mate changes, depending on gender and circumstances. Because many of the changes individuals experience have occurred repeatedly over human evolutionary history, we have evolved psychological adaptations designed to deal with them. A person who steadily ascends a status hierarchy may suddenly be passed by a more talented newcomer. A hunter’s promise may be cut suddenly short by a debilitating injury. An older woman’s son may become the chief of her tribe. An ignored introvert, long regarded as occupying the bottom rungs of desirability as a mate, may achieve renown through a dazzling invention that is useful to the group. A young married couple bursting with health may tragically discover that one of them is infertile. Ignoring change would have been maladaptive, impeding solutions to critical challenges. We have evolved psychological mechanisms designed to alert us to these changes and motivate us to take problem-solving action.

In a sense, all mating behavior entails changes over time, from the early hormonal stirrings triggered by puberty to grandparents’ attempts to influence the mating decisions of their kin. Clarifying one’s mating desires takes time. Honing the skills of attraction takes practice. Mating is never static through life. The goal of this chapter is to describe some of the broader changes that occur among men and women over the course of their mating lives—the losses and the triumphs, the uncertainties and the inevitabilities.


