Revealing Physical Prowess

Men display physical and athletic prowess in modern times as part of their tactical arsenal for attracting women. Newlywed and undergraduate couples alike report that men display their strength roughly twice as often as women and display athletic prowess roughly 50 percent more often than women as part of their courtship tactics. Furthermore, displays of strength and athleticism are judged to be significantly more effective for attracting mates when used by men. Flexing muscles, playing sports, mentioning feats of athletic prowess, and lifting weights all figure more prominently in men’s attraction tactics. College students’ evaluations of derogation tactics reveal that displays of physical and athletic prowess are significantly more effective for attracting casual sex partners than for attracting spouses. Perhaps this is why men are more likely to show photos of themselves revealing upper torso shots with bulging biceps and six-pack abs on hookup sites like Tinder than on more serious dating sites like eHarmony or OKCupid. The derogation tactics that stand out as more effective in casual contexts than permanent ones include putting down a rival’s strength and athletic ability. Mentioning that a rival is physically weak, outshining a competitor in sports, and physically dominating a rival are more effective short-term than long-term tactics. These studies support the common observation that male athletes, especially star players, enjoy success at attracting women for casual sex.

Among the Yanomamö, a man’s status is heavily determined by his physical feats, which include chest-pounding duels, ax fights, combat against neighboring villages, and physically vanquishing rivals. The status gained through physical prowess translates into greater sexual access, which historically was a key route to greater reproductive success. Indeed, men who have demonstrated their prowess through killing other men (unokai) have more wives and more children than same-aged non-unokai men.18 Physical and athletic displays, in short, have always been powerful attractors in traditional and modern societies alike.


