Demonstrating Commitment

Displays of love, commitment, and devotion are powerful attractions to a woman. They signal that a man is willing to channel his time, energy, and effort to her over the long run. Commitment is difficult and costly to fake, because commitment is gauged from repeated signals over time. Men who are interested only in casual sex are unlikely to invest this much effort. The reliability of commitment display as a signal renders it an especially effective technique for attracting women.

The mate attraction studies confirm the power of displaying commitment in the long-term mating market. Discussing cohabitation or marriage signals that a man would like to integrate the woman into his social and family life, commit his resources to her, and perhaps have children with her. Offering to convert to her religion shows a willingness to accommodate to her needs. Showing a deep concern for her problems communicates emotional support and a commitment to be there in times of need. The 100 newlywed women we surveyed all reported that their husbands displayed these signals during their courtship, confirming that they were highly effective when used.

One strong signal of commitment is a man’s persistence in courtship. It can take the form of spending a lot of time with a woman, seeing her often, dating her for an extended period of time, calling her frequently on the phone, and texting or emailing her frequently. These tactics are highly effective at attracting long-term mates, with average effectiveness ratings of 5.48 on a 7-point scale, but only moderately effective (4.54) at attracting sex partners. Furthermore, persistence in courtship proves to be more effective for a man than for a woman because it signals that he is interested in more than casual sex.

The effectiveness of sheer persistence in courtship is illustrated by a story told by one newlywed: “Initially, I was not interested in John at all. I thought he was kind of nerdy, so I kept turning him down and turning him down. But he kept calling me up, showing up at my work, arranging to run into me. I finally agreed to go out with him just to get him off my back. One thing led to another, and six months later, we got married.”

Persistence also worked for a German university professor. While returning to Germany by train from a professional conference in Poland, he started talking to an attractive physician, twelve years his junior. The conversation became animated as their attraction for one another grew. The physician was on her way to Amsterdam, not Germany, and before long the station where she had to change trains was upon them. The physician said good-bye to the professor, but he insisted on helping her with her luggage and carried it to a station locker for her. As his train pulled away from the station the professor berated himself for failing to seize the moment. He decided to take action. At the next station he got off and boarded another train back to where he had left the physician. He searched the station in vain—there were no signs of her. On foot, he searched all the stores and shops surrounding the station. No luck. Finally, he went back to the station and planted himself in front of the locker into which he had loaded her luggage. When she eventually returned, she was surprised to see him and impressed by his persistence in tracking her down. A year later she left her native Poland to marry him in Germany. Without tenacity, the professor would have lost her irretrievably. Persistence pays.

Displays of kindness, which also signal commitment, figure prominently in successful attraction techniques. Men who demonstrate an understanding of a woman’s problems, show sensitivity to her needs, act compassionately toward her, and perform helpful deeds succeed in attracting women as long-term mates. Kindness works because it signals that the man cares for the woman, will be there for her in good times and bad, and will channel resources to her. It signals long-term romantic interest rather than purely sexual interest.

Another tactic for revealing kindness is to display nurturance toward children. In one study, women saw photos of the same man in three different conditions—standing alone, interacting positively with a baby, and ignoring a baby in distress.11 Women were most attracted to the man when he acted warmly toward the baby and were least attracted to him when he ignored the baby in distress. When men, however, were shown analogous photos of a woman standing alone, showing positive feelings toward a baby, and ignoring a baby in distress, their attraction to her was identical in all these contexts. Showing nurturance toward the young is apparently an attraction tactic that is effective mainly for men and works by signaling a proclivity to commit to and care for children. Showing warmth toward a cute puppy or kitten might have similar effects.

Men also signal their commitment by showing loyalty and fidelity. Signs of promiscuity, in contrast, indicate that the man is pursuing a purely sexual mating strategy. Short-term strategists typically distribute their attentions and resources over several women. Out of 130 possible ways for men to attract a mate, women regard showing fidelity as the second most effective action, just a shade behind displaying an empathic understanding of the woman’s problems.

Because fidelity signals commitment, an effective tactic for denigrating a rival is to question the rival’s sexual intentions. When a man tells a woman that his rival just wants casual sex, for example, women are turned off to that rival for committed mating. Similarly, saying that a rival cheats on women and cannot stay loyal to just one woman is highly effective at decreasing a rival’s long-term attractiveness to women.12

Displays of love provide another sign of commitment. A man can attract a woman by doing special things for her, showing a loving devotion to her, and saying “I love you.” Men and women rate these actions as among the top 10 percent of all tactics for attracting a woman for commitment. Demonstrations of love convey cues to long-term intentions.

Whereas signals of commitment prove highly effective in attracting long-term mates, creating an illusion of commitment can be effective in attracting and seducing a woman. Men looking for casual liaisons compete by mimicking what women desire in enduring mateships. This tactic is especially potent when women use casual sex to evaluate prospective husbands. Women are more receptive, even in the short term, to men who appear to embody their ideals in a long-term mate.

Some men exploit this tactic to attract women as casual sex partners. The psychologists William Tooke and Lori Camire studied exploitative and deceptive attraction tactics in a university population.13 From a nomination procedure parallel to the one used in the attraction studies, they assembled a list of eighty-eight ways in which men and women deceive one another in the service of attracting a mate. Participants reported misleading the other sex about career expectations, sucking in their stomachs when walking near members of the opposite sex, appearing to be more trusting and considerate than they really were, and acting uninterested in having sex when sex actually loomed large in their thoughts.

A singles bar study produced similar results. Four researchers spent approximately 100 person-hours sitting in singles bars in Washtenaw County in Michigan, writing down each attraction tactic they witnessed. Through this procedure, they observed 109 attraction tactics, such as sucking seductively on a straw, offering to buy someone a drink, sticking out one’s chest, and staring at someone’s body. Then a different sample of 100 university students evaluated these tactics for their probable effectiveness at attracting them when employed by a person of the other sex. Women stated that the most effective tactics for attracting them would be displaying good manners, offering help, and acting sympathetic and caring.14 Mimicking what women want in a husband by showing kindness and sincere interest, in short, is also an effective technique for luring women into brief sexual liaisons.

The deception study found that men use several tactics to deceive women about their intentions. Men pretend to be interested in starting a relationship when they are not really interested and act as if they care about a woman even though they really do not. Most men are fully aware that feigning commitment is an effective tactic for short-term sexual attraction, and they admit to deceiving women by this means. Men using Tinder, Hinge, and other dating apps admit that they pretend to be open to being in a relationship even though their real interest lies in racking up large numbers of short-term sexual conquests. One man who estimated that he had hooked up with thirty or forty women over the past year through dating apps admitted, “I sort of play that I could be a boyfriend kind of guy,” in order to win them over, “but then they start wanting me to care more . . . and I just don’t.”15

As the biologist Lynn Margulis notes: “Any animal that can perceive can be deceived.” “Deception consists of mimicking the truth,” comments the biologist Robert Trivers in describing how the technique works. “[It is] a parasitism of the preexisting system for communicating correct information.” Whenever females look for investing males, some males deceive about their willingness to invest. Certain male insects offer females food, only to take it back after the copulation is complete.16 They then use the same resources to court another female. For females, this strategy poses the problem of detecting deception, discovering insincerity, and penetrating disguise. One of the human solutions to this problem is to place a premium on honesty.

Displaying honesty is in fact a powerful tactic a man can use to obtain a long-term mate. This tactic conveys that the man is not simply seeking a transient sex partner. Of the 130 identified tactics to attract a female mate, three of the top ones suggest openness and honesty—acting truthful with the woman, communicating feelings to her directly and openly, and simply being oneself. All of these tactics are among the most effective 10 percent of all attraction tactics that men can use.

Because of the adaptive problem historically imposed on women by men’s dual sexual strategy of short-term and long-term relationships, tactics that allow women a clear window for evaluating a man’s actual characteristics and intentions prove to be highly attractive. Signals of dishonesty conceal those characteristics and intentions, rendering that assessment window cloudy or opaque.

If signs of commitment are highly effective, cues that resources are already committed elsewhere undermine attraction. Roughly 30 percent of the men on the Tinder app, which is widely regarded as a short-term mating app, are married. Among the men who patronize singles bars, many are married or have steady relationships. Some have children who command large shares of their resources. These men report removing their wedding rings before entering the bars. After intensive grilling of men at one singles bar, researchers found that “12 people admitted that they were married. . . . We suspected that others were married, by somewhat rather undefinable qualities, sometimes connected with a rather mysterious withholding of various kinds of information about everyday life styles.”17 Because being married clearly interferes with attracting women, it becomes a liability for men who fail to conceal it.

University students confirm that knowledge of prior commitments hinders a man’s efforts to attract a woman. Indeed, out of eighty-three tactics that men can perform to render a rival less attractive to women, mentioning that he has a serious girlfriend is seen as the most effective one.

Signals of commitment help men to attract women because they signal that they are pursuing a long-term sexual strategy. These displays communicate that his resources will be channeled exclusively to her.


