Changes in Commitment

Women and men become increasingly distressed by their partner’s failure to show affection and attention, which suggests a lowered commitment to the relationship. Women are more distressed than men by declining affection. Whereas only 8 percent of newlywed women complain about their partner’s failure to express love, 18 percent of women voice this complaint by the time they are four years into the marriage.13 In comparison, only 4 percent of newlywed men are upset about their wives’ failure to express love, which doubles to 8 percent by the fourth year of marriage. Whereas 64 percent of newlywed women complain that their husbands sometimes fail to pay attention when they speak, 80 percent of women are disturbed by this behavior by the fourth and fifth years of marriage. Fewer husbands overall show distress about their partners’ inattentiveness, but the increase in this complaint over time parallels that of their wives, rising from 18 percent to34 percent during the first four years of marriage.

Another indication of the withdrawal of commitment over time is one spouse ignoring the other’s feelings. Among newlywed women, 35 percent express distress about having their feelings ignored, whereas four years later this figure has jumped to 57 percent. The comparable figures for complaints by men are 12 percent in the first year and 32 percent in the fourth. These changes signify a gradual diminution of commitment to a spouse over time, which occurs for both sexes but is more upsetting to women than to men.

While women are more disturbed about men’s increasing failure to show commitment through affection and attention, men are more distressed by their wives’ growing demands for commitment. Whereas 22 percent of newlywed men complain that their wives demand too much of their time, 36 percent of husbands express upset about this demand by the fourth year of marriage. The comparable figures for women are only 2 percent and 7 percent. Similarly, 16 percent of newlywed men express distress over their wives’ demands for attention, whereas 29 percent voice this complaint in the fourth marital year. The comparable figures for women are only 3 percent and 8 percent. Thus, although both genders show increasing distress about their partners’ demands for commitment, more men than women are troubled by these changes.

These changes are accompanied by a shift in the effort that men allocate to mate guarding—another index of commitment. In evolutionary terms, a man’s efforts to guard his mate should be most intense when his mate is youngest and hence most reproductively valuable, because failure to retain a mate carries the most severe reproductive penalties when the woman has the highest value. The age of a husband, however, would not necessarily govern the intensity of a woman’s efforts to keep him. The mate value of a man does not necessarily decline from age twenty to forty, as it does for a woman, because his capacity to accrue resources often increases with age. Thus, the intensity of a woman’s efforts to retain a mate should be linked less to a man’s age than to his effectiveness at providing her with valuable resources.

My lab confirmed these predictions in a study of the tactics that husbands and wives use to retain their mates.14 Using newlywed couples ranging in age from twenty to forty, we explored the frequency of nineteen tactics, which ranged from positive inducements, such as bestowing gifts and lavishing attention, to negative inducements, such as threats and violence. We then correlated tactics with the age of the tactician, the age of the mate, and the length of the relationship. We found that the frequency and intensity of the husbands’ efforts were a direct function of the age of their wives. Men guarded wives in their middle to late thirties significantly less intensely than wives in their early to middle twenties. Men married to younger wives tended especially to perform acts that signaled to other men to stay away—telling other men directly that their wives were already taken, showing physical affection when other men were around, and asking their wives to wear rings and other ornaments that signaled their committed status. Husbands of younger women were more likely to glare at other men who paid attention to their wives and sometimes threatened them with bodily harm. In contrast, wives’ efforts to keep older husbands were just as frequent as their efforts devoted to keeping younger husbands. Regardless of the husband’s age, there was no difference in women’s vigilance, monopolization of time, and appearance enhancement tactics. The intensity of women’s efforts to guard their mates is unrelated to the age of the man, showing a marked contrast to men’s reliance on a woman’s age to calibrate the intensity of their guarding.

The most plausible explanation for this sex difference is the decrease in a woman’s reproductive capacity with age. If declines in mate guarding were related to the fact that people simply get tired or complacent when they get older, as all of their functions senesce, then the degree of mate guarding would be directly related to the age of the person doing the guarding. But neither the age of the man nor the age of the woman is a good indicator of their efforts to hold on to their mates. And if the intensity of men’s guarding zeal were related to the length of the relationship, that zeal would dwindle as the relationship got older. But the study showed instead that the length of the relationship is not related to the intensity of the guarding efforts. In short, the most plausible reason for the effect of a woman’s age on the intensity of a man’s efforts to guard her is that women of differing ages differ in their overall desirability and men devote less effort to guarding an older wife than a younger wife.

The population of the Caribbean island of Trinidad illustrates this pattern of mate guarding.15 His observations of 480 individuals at regular intervals showed the anthropologist Mark Flinn that men whose wives are fecund (young and not pregnant at the time) spend more time with their mates and get into more fights with rival men. In contrast, men whose wives are infecund (older, pregnant, or having just given birth) spend less time with their mates and get along better with other men. Flinn concludes that the reproductive potential of a man’s mate is the key determinant of the intensity of his mate guarding.

In Middle Eastern societies that encourage the practice of sequestering women, postpubescent women are veiled and concealed most heavily when they are youngest, and these practices relax as women age.16 Homicidal rages of husbands over real or suspected infidelities occur worldwide and most often if they have young wives, regardless of the age of the husband. Wives who are less than twenty years old are more than twice as likely as women who are more than twenty to be killed by a husband in a jealous rage.17 These are just a few of the extreme strategies that men use to prevent other men from gaining sexual access to young wives. As their wives get older, men’s efforts to control them become less intense.


