Infidelity

The most powerful indicator of a man’s failure to retain access to a woman’s reproductive capacity is her infidelity. The most powerful cue to a woman’s failure to retain access to a man’s resources is his infidelity. Among the forty-three causes of conjugal dissolution, ranging from the absence of male children to sexual neglect, adultery is the single most pervasive cause, being cited in eighty-eight societies. Among those that highlight adultery, there are strong gender differences in prevalence. Although in twenty-five societies divorce follows from adultery by either partner, fifty-four societies sanction divorce only if the wife is adulterous; in only two societies does divorce occur only following the husband’s adultery. Even these two societies can hardly be considered exceptions to the sexual double standard, because an unfaithful wife rarely goes without punishment. In both of these cultures, men are known to thrash their wife upon discovery of her infidelity and occasionally a woman is beaten to death by her husband. Unfaithful wives in these two cultures may not be divorced, but neither do they get off lightly.

The finding that a woman’s infidelity is a more prevalent cause of divorce is especially striking because men are more likely to be unfaithful.10 Alfred Kinsey, for example, found that 50 percent of the husbands but only 26 percent of the wives surveyed had been unfaithful.11 More recent studies find similar gender differences in infidelity rates.12 The sexual double standard in reactions to infidelity is not confined to American culture or to Western societies but is observed across the globe. Its pervasiveness stems from three possible sources. First, men have greater power to impose their will, so that women may be forced to tolerate infidelity in their husbands more often than men are forced to tolerate infidelity in their wives. Second, women worldwide may be more forgiving of their husband’s sexual indiscretions because sexual infidelity per se has been less costly for women than for men over human evolutionary history, unless also accompanied by the diversion of his resources and commitments. Third, women worldwide may more often be forced to tolerate a husband’s infidelity because of the prohibitively high costs of divorce, especially if they have children, who curtail women’s value on the mating market. For all these reasons, a wife’s unfaithfulness more often causes an irrevocable rift that ends in divorce.

Knowing that infidelity causes conjugal dissolution, some people may use it intentionally to get out of a bad marriage. In a study of the breakup of mates, we asked one hundred men and women which tactics they would use to get out of a bad relationship. Subsequently, a different group of fifty-four individuals evaluated each tactic for its effectiveness in accomplishing the goal.13 One common method for getting rid of an unwanted mate was to start an affair, perhaps by sleeping around in an obvious manner or arranging to be seen with a member of the other gender in some other questionable situation.

Sometimes an actual affair is not carried out but is merely alluded to or implied. People use the tactics of flirting with others or telling a partner that they are in love with someone else so that the mate will end the relationship. A related tactic is to express a wish to date other people in order to be sure that the two of them are truly right for each other, a means of gracefully exiting from the relationship through a gradual transition out of commitment.

So widely accepted is infidelity as a reason to get rid of a mate that people sometimes exploit it, even if no actual infidelity has occurred. In Truk, for example, if a husband wants to terminate a marriage, he has merely to spread a rumor about his wife’s adultery, pretend to believe it, and leave her in indignation.14 Apparently, people care about justifying a marital dissolution to their social circles. Pretending that an affair has occurred provides this justification because infidelity is so widely regarded as a compelling reason for breaking up.


