Competing Explanations for Gender Differences in Jealousy

The evolutionary interpretation of sex differences in jealousy has been challenged.24 Some have proposed that sexual infidelity and emotional infidelity are often correlated, and indeed they are. People tend to get emotionally involved with those with whom they have sex and, conversely, tend to become sexually involved with those with whom they are emotionally close. But men and women might differ in their beliefs about the correlation. According to this hypothesis, perhaps women get more upset about a partner’s emotional involvement with someone else because they think it implies that their partner will also become sexually involved. Women might believe that men can have sex, in contrast, without getting emotionally involved, and so imagining a partner’s sexual involvement with another person is less upsetting. Men’s beliefs might differ. Perhaps men get more upset about a partner’s sexual involvement with another man because they think that she is likely to have sex with him only if she is also emotionally involved, whereas they think that a woman can easily become emotionally involved without having sex with a man.

My team and I conducted four empirical studies in three cultures to test predictions from the competing evolutionary and belief hypotheses.25 The first study involved 1,122 undergraduates at a liberal arts college in the southeastern United States. The original infidelity scenarios were altered to render the two types of infidelity mutually exclusive. Participants reported their relative distress in response to a partner’s sexual infidelity with no emotional involvement and their response to the partner’s emotional involvement with no sexual infidelity. A large gender difference emerged, as predicted by the evolutionary model. If the belief hypothesis were correct, then the gender difference should have disappeared. It did not.

Our second study provided four additional tests of the predictions from the two models, using three research strategies. One strategy employed three versions of rendering the two types of infidelity mutually exclusive. A second strategy posited that both types of infidelity had occurred and asked participants to indicate which aspect they found more upsetting. A third strategy used a statistical procedure to test the independent predictive value of sex and beliefs in accounting for which form of infidelity would be more distressing. The results were conclusive: large gender differences were discovered, precisely as predicted by the evolutionary model. No matter how the questions were worded, no matter which methodological strategy was employed, and no matter how stringently the conditional probabilities were controlled, the gender differences remained robust.

Our third study replicated the infidelity dilemmas in a non-Western sample of native Koreans. The original sex differences were replicated. With two strategies to control for the co-occurrence of sexual and emotional infidelity, the gender differences again remained robust. The evolutionary hypothesis survived this empirical hurdle. In our fourth study, we tested the predictions about jealousy and about the nature of beliefs in a non-Western Japanese sample. The results again provided support for the evolutionary hypothesis. In yet another study, Brooke Scelza surveyed a small-scale population, the Himba of Namibia, and also found that men more than women were more distressed by the sexual aspect of the infidelity when both forms of infidelity occurred.26 And finally, the evolutionary psychologist Barry Kuhle analyzed spontaneous jealous interrogations following the discovery of an actual infidelity. He found that men more than women wanted to know, “Did you have sex with him?” whereas women more than men wanted to know, “Do you love her?”27

Perhaps more important than the details of any one study is evaluation by the key scientific criterion—the weight of the evidence.28 The sex differences in jealousy have now been discovered using an astonishingly wide array of diverse methods. The sex differences in jealousy using the forced-choice method are robust across cultures such as Brazil, England, Romania, Korea, Japan, the Netherlands, Norway, and Sweden, suggesting universality.29 The sex differences remain robust when participants are asked “which aspect” of the infidelity would be most distressing when both sexual infidelity and emotional infidelity have occurred. Most, although not all, researchers examining physiological responses to jealousy have replicated the sex differences in physiological distress. The sex differences become even more pronounced among those who have experienced an actual infidelity in their lives and when participants undergo a procedure that requires them to vividly imagine the experience of infidelity. Men have more difficulty than women in forgiving a sexual than an emotional infidelity and indicate a greater likelihood of ending a relationship following a sexual infidelity than an emotional one.

Cognitively, men, compared to women, show greater memorial recall of cues to sexual than to emotional infidelity; preferentially search for cues to sexual rather than to emotional infidelity; involuntarily focus attention on cues to sexual rather than to emotional infidelity; and show faster decision times in response to cues to sexual than to emotional infidelity.

A study of brain activation, using fMRI brain scans of participants as they viewed imagery of sexual and emotional infidelity, found striking sex differences.30 Men showed far greater activation than women in the amygdala and hypothalamus—brain regions involved in sexuality and aggression. Women, in contrast, showed greater activation than men in the posterior superior sulcus—a brain region involved in the process of mind-reading, such as inferring a partner’s future intentions. These findings are precisely what we would expect if male and female jealousy adaptations were designed to solve somewhat different adaptive problems.31 In sum, the sex differences in jealousy remain robust across cultures and across a wide range of methods, including psychological dilemmas, physiological recordings, cognitive experiments, and fMRI recordings of brain activation.

Several other gender-differentiated design features of the jealousy adaptation have been documented. Men’s jealousy is especially attuned to rivals who have status and resources; women’s jealousy is especially attuned to rivals who are physically attractive.32 One man said, “The thought of my ex having sex with another was excruciating. . . . I would stay awake with this thought going through my head, could feel my temperature rise to boiling point.”33 One woman said that, “with girls, if they are pretty, or if he says they are pretty, I don’t like it at all.”34 Interestingly, these sex differences in distress over the attributes of rivals—women’s anger at a rival’s attractiveness and men’s anger at a rival’s status and resources—show up even in women and men diagnosed as having “pathological” jealousy.35

Men more than women display an “infidelity overperception bias” in overestimating their partner’s likelihood of sexual infidelity.36 Finally, among women and men who are prone to chronic jealousy and worry a lot about relationship threats, the gender differences in response to sexual versus emotional infidelity are especially large.37


