Repelling Mate Poachers

Like many species, humans show proprietary attitudes toward their possessions and toward their mates. One method for signaling ownership is a public marking that tells rivals to stay away. Public signals of possession can be verbal, as in introducing a person as a spouse or lover and bragging about a mate to friends. Public signals can be physical, such as holding hands with or putting one’s arm around a mate in front of other people. Public signals can also be ornamental, such as asking a mate to wear one’s jacket, giving jewelry that signifies that the person is taken, and displaying a Facebook relationship status to signify that the person is taken.

Although men and women do not differ in how often they use these public measures to repel mate poachers, our expert panel judged the signals to be significantly more effective when used by men than by women.43 The reason may be that public signals provide a strong cue to the woman of a man’s intent to commit. An engagement ring, for example, sends a strong signal to potential mate poachers. Verbal, physical, and ornamental displays attain their effectiveness by dissuading potential competitors, just as the male insect who mingles his scent with that of the female causes rivals to seek other mates who are uncontested. These displays also communicate a commitment that fulfills women’s long-term desires.

Maintaining vigilance is an additional means that both sexes use to keep their mates away from others. An animal analogue occurs among the male elephant seals on the California coast. They maintain a vigil against rivals and female defections by patrolling the perimeter of their harem. Calling a mate at unexpected times, reading his or her email, or monitoring Facebook posts are human exercises of vigilance. Vigilance represents an effort to detect whether there are any signs of defection in the mate. Vigilance also conveys a message to a mate that evidence of consorting with rivals will be detected and acted upon. People in our evolutionary past who were not vigilant experienced more defections than those who kept a watchful eye.

The tactic of concealing mates is closely related to vigilance. The male wasp whisks his mate away from the path that might be tracked by other males. Men and women conceal their mates by refusing to take them to parties where competitors will be present, refusing to introduce them to friends who might mate-poach, and taking them away from gatherings filled with potential competitors. Concealment attains its effectiveness by reducing the contact of mates with rivals and reducing the opportunities for mates to assess alternative mating prospects.

A close cousin of concealment is monopolizing a mate’s time—insisting that all free time be spent together and monopolizing the mate at social gatherings. Monopolizing a mate prevents that person from having contact with potential rivals who could poach him or her or be appealing as an attractive alternative.

These forms of mate retention have historical and cross-cultural precedents. Claustration, or the concealment of women to prevent their contact with potential sexual partners, provides a vivid example of mate monopolization. Historically, Indian men have secluded women in the interior of dwellings. Arab men have concealed the faces and bodies of women with veils or burkas. Japanese men have bound the feet of women to restrict their mobility. In societies that practice veiling, weddings are the venue for the most extreme forms of this variety of concealment—that is, those in which the greatest surface area of the skin is covered—because a woman getting married is close to peak fertility. Young prepubescent girls and older postmenopausal women are less severely concealed because they are viewed as less enticing to other men.44

Another common practice throughout human history has been for men to gather women into guarded harems. The term harem means “forbidden.” Indeed, it was often as difficult for women to leave harems as it was for outside men to get in. Kings and other rulers used eunuchs to guard their harems. In India during the sixteenth century, merchants supplied rich men with a steady supply of Bengali slave eunuchs, who not only were castrated but had their entire genitalia cut off.45

The number of women collected into harems is staggering by any standard. The Indian emperor Bhuponder Singh had 332 women in his harem when he died, “all of [whom] were at the beck and call of the Maharaja. He could satisfy his sexual lust with any of them at any time of day or night.”46 In India, the harems of sixteenth-century kings were estimated to have between 4,000 and 12,000 occupants.47 In Imperial China, emperors around 771 BC kept one queen, three consorts or wives of the first rank, nine wives of the second rank, twenty-seven wives of the third rank, and eighty-one concubines.48 In Peru, an Inca lord kept a minimum of 700 women “for the service of his house and on whom to take his pleasure . . . [having] many children by these women.”49

All of these public signals of mate retention served the sole goal of preventing contact between the mates and potential rivals. Because high-status men historically have been in a position of power, their ability to apply extreme tactics has reduced women’s freedom of choice. In modern industrial societies, with greater gender equality, both sexes deploy public signals—albeit typically less drastic ones than those used by medieval lords—to retain their mates.


