Context-Dependent Shifts in Women’s Desires

In addition to a woman’s personal economic power, several other circumstances cause predictable changes in which men she desires. These include whether other women find a man attractive, whether she is seeking a committed partner or casual sex, and her own mate value.

One of the most successful beer commercials of all time depicts a well-dressed man with a bottle of Dos Equis in his hand. Depending on the version, there are either two or three very attractive women surrounding him. This commercial might appeal to men because it implies that they will enhance their attractiveness to women if they drink this brand of beer. But being surrounded by beautiful women also makes the man more attractive to women. Animal biologists have given this phenomenon the clunky name mate copying. From fish to birds, females use the apparent preferences of other females as critical information about a potential mate’s mate value. Mate copying has also been found in humans in my lab (in a study led by Sarah Hill) and in four other labs. Women find men surrounded by other women especially attractive if those women are themselves physically attractive and if they seem attentive to, and interested in, the man.

Temporal context—whether a woman is seeking a sexual hookup or a committed partner—also influences desire. In long-term mating, women prioritize character traits such as kindness, dependability, and emotional stability, as well as qualities that signal excellent future status and resource potential, such as ambition, industriousness, and education. For casual sex partners, however, these qualities become considerably less important. Instead, women emphasize physical attractiveness, desirability to other women, and higher levels of masculinity—qualities that might be linked with “good genes,” a topic we cover in greater depth in Chapter 4.

Finally, women’s own level of desirability influences their desires. It may not come as a shock that women who are 8’s are generally choosier than women who are 6’s or 5’s. More desirable women have more bargaining power on the mating market, and they can elevate their standards. Women with high mate value in Canada, America, Croatia, Poland, Brazil, and Japan have been found to list a longer set of sought-after traits in their personal ads. They want higher levels of resources, education, and intelligence; higher social status; good parenting skills; good partner skills; and a raft of other traits. What may be less intuitively obvious is that women with high mate value are especially drawn to masculine men compared with their lower-mate-value counterparts. This disparity has been found for vocal masculinity as well as facial masculinity. One speculation for this preference shift pivots on the finding that masculine men tend on average to be less faithful than less masculine men. Perhaps only a woman who is high in mate value herself feels that she can control the wandering eye of an attractive, masculine man by reminding him that he risks losing her.


