Mate Ejection Tactics

Extricating oneself from a committed mateship can be diabolically difficult. The rejected partner might not want to let go. Family and friends sometimes apply pressure to stay together. Shared children complicate the disentangling. And in our modern environment, divorce laws and intertwined finances can extend the process of separation from months to years.

Some evolutionary psychologists argue that we have evolved specialized mate ejection adaptations to facilitate breakups.43 Although the scientific study of mate ejection tactics is in its infancy, it has yielded a few key insights. One tactic is simply to tell the partner straighforwardly that both should start seeing other people. Another is to begin having sex with others and let the partner find out—a tactic judged to be one of the most effective, albeit potentially dangerous. Variants include having sex with a partner’s friend, being seen at social gatherings with other potential mates, or leaving evidence of an affair in plain sight so that a partner will discover it.

A third tactic is withdrawal of various kinds of resources. Some mates simply cease showing affection, stop saying “I love you,” and stop having sex with the partner. Some stop defending the partner when insulted by others or derogated publicly. Withholding benefits inherent in the mateship sometimes causes the partner to leave for greener mating pastures. Predictably, men are more likely than women to stop giving gifts and other economic resources to the partner as a means of mate expulsion. Women are more likely than men to refuse to have sex with their partner and decline their partner’s sexual advances.

The flip side of withholding benefits is inflicting costs. Both men and women become more irritable with their partners and pick fights over small things. When verbal abuse sometimes escalates to physical abuse, such as slapping or hitting, a partner may flee to escape incurring these costs. Because cruelty and unkindness are key causes of dissolution, people sometimes ramp up these unsavory tactics to hasten a breakup.

In the modern environment, a common tactic is “ghosting”—ceasing all communications, such as texting or emailing. Some remove the partner as a “friend” from their Facebook page or change their Facebook status from “in a relationship” to “single.” These behaviors send strong rejection signals to the partner and also have the effect of communicating to the broader social network that the relationship is over.

All mate ejection tactics carry potential costs, which range from reputational damage to an ex seeking revenge. The cliché “hell hath no fury like a woman scorned” turns out to apply at least as much to men. Indeed, men are more likely than women to seek revenge using abhorrent tactics such as stalking or posting nude photos of their ex on revenge websites.44 Consequently, those who initiate breakups often attempt to curtail these costs. Saying, “It’s not you, it’s me,” and “I think we should be ‘friends,’” are classic efforts in this direction and are sometimes successful.

Regardless of whether someone is getting ejected or doing the ejecting, both face new adaptive problems after a breakup—problems that require coping strategies.


