Intelligence

Dependability, emotional stability, industriousness, and ambition are not the only personal qualities that signal the acquisition and steadiness of resources. The ephemeral quality of intelligence provides another important cue. No one knows for sure what intelligence tests measure, but there is clear evidence of what high scorers can do. Intelligence is a good predictor of the possession of economic resources within the United States.35 People who test high go to better schools, get more years of education, and ultimately get higher-paying jobs. Even within particular professions, such as construction and carpentry, intelligence predicts who will advance more rapidly to positions of power and command higher incomes. In tribal societies, the head men or leaders are almost invariably among the more intelligent members of the group.36

If intelligence has been a reliable predictor of economic resources over human evolutionary history, then women could have evolved a preference for this quality in a potential marriage partner. The international study on choosing a mate found that women rated education and intelligence fifth out of eighteen desirable characteristics. Ranked in a smaller list of thirteen desirable characteristics, intelligence emerged in second place worldwide. Women valued intelligence more than men in ten out of the thirty-seven cultures. Estonian women, for example, ranked intelligence third out of thirteen desired characteristics, whereas Estonian men ranked it fifth. Norwegian women valued it second, whereas Norwegian men ranked it fourth. In the remaining twenty-seven cultures, however, both sexes placed the same high premium on intelligence.

The quality of intelligence signals many potential benefits. These are likely to include good parenting skills, capacity for cultural knowledge, and adeptness at parenting.37 In addition, intelligence is linked with oral fluency, ability to influence other members of a group, prescience in forecasting danger, and judgment in applying health remedies. Beyond these specific qualities, intelligence conveys the ability to solve problems. Some have speculated that intelligence is a marker of “good genes” that can be passed on to sons and daughters.38 Women who select more intelligent mates are more likely to become the recipients of all of these critical benefits.

To identify some of the actions that intelligent people perform, my lab asked 140 men and women to think of the most intelligent people they knew and to describe five actions that reflected their intelligence. Their descriptions of these five types of actions imply the benefits that may flow to someone fortunate enough to choose an intelligent person as a mate: (1) intelligent people tend to have a wide perspective and to see an issue from multiple points of view, suggesting better judgment and decision making; (2) they communicate messages well to other people and are sensitive to signs of how others are feeling, suggesting good social skills; (3) they know where to go to solve problems, implying good judgment; (4) intelligent people manage money well, suggesting that resources will not be lost or squandered; and (5) they make few mistakes in accomplishing tasks they have never before attempted, suggesting an efficiency in problem solving and allocating time. By selecting an intelligent mate, women increase their chances of receiving all these benefits.

Contrast these benefits with the costs imposed by less intelligent people. Their behavior includes failing to pick up subtle hints from others, missing a joke that everyone else gets, and saying the wrong thing at the wrong time, all of which suggest a lack of social adeptness. Less intelligent people repeat mistakes, suggesting that they have less ability to learn from experience. They fail to follow simple verbal instructions, fail to grasp explanations, and persist in arguing when they are obviously wrong. This behavior implies that unintelligent mates are poor problem solvers, unreliable workers, and social liabilities.

Ancestral women who preferred intelligent mates would have raised their odds of securing social, material, and economic resources for themselves and for their children. Since intelligence is moderately heritable, these favorable qualities would have been passed on genetically to their sons and daughters, providing an added genetic benefit. Modern women and most men across all cultures hold these preferences.


