The Importance of Physical Appearance

Because of the bounty of fertility cues conveyed by a woman’s physical appearance, and because male standards of beauty have evolved to correspond to these cues, men have evolved to prioritize appearance and attractiveness in their mate preferences. In the United States mate preferences for physical attractiveness, physical appearance, good looks, or beauty have been lavishly documented. When 5,000 college students were asked in the 1950s to identify the characteristics they wanted in a future husband or wife, men listed physical attractiveness far more often than women did.29 The sheer number of terms that men listed betrayed their values. They wanted a wife who was pretty, attractive, beautiful, gorgeous, comely, lovely, ravishing, and glamorous. American college women, at that time at least, rarely listed physical appearance as paramount in their ideal husband.

Multi-decade mating studies in the United States from 1939 to 1996 found that men rate physical attractiveness and good looks as more important and desirable in a potential mate than do women.30 Men tend to see attractiveness as important, whereas women tend to see it as desirable but not very important. The gender difference in the importance of attractiveness remains constant from one generation to the next. Its size does not vary throughout the decades. Men’s greater preference for physically attractive mates is among the most consistently documented psychological sex differences.31

This does not mean that the importance people place on attractiveness is forever fixed. On the contrary, the importance of attractiveness increased dramatically in the United States in the twentieth century.32 For nearly every decade since 1930, physical appearance grew in importance for men and women about equally, corresponding with the rise in television, fashion magazines, advertising, and other media depictions of attractive models. For example, the importance attached to good looks in a marriage partner on a scale of 0.00 to 3.00 increased between 1939 and 1989 from 1.50 to 2.11 for men and from 0.94 to 1.67 for women. Similar shifts have been observed in China, India, and Brazil well into the twenty-first century.33 These shifts show that mate preferences can change. But the sex difference so far remains invariant. The gap between men and women has been constant since the late 1930s in all countries studied thus far.

These sex differences are not limited to the United States or to Western cultures. Regardless of the location, habitat, marriage system, or cultural living arrangement, men in all thirty-seven cultures included in the international study on choosing a mate valued physical appearance in a potential mate more than women did. China typified the average difference in importance attached to beauty: Chinese men gave it a 2.06 and women gave it a 1.59. This internationally consistent sex difference persists despite variations in ranking, in wording, and in race, ethnicity, religion, hemisphere, political system, and mating system. Among the Hadza, more than five times as many men as women placed great importance on fertility in a spouse.34 When asked how they could tell that a woman could have many children, most Hadza men responded by saying, “You can tell just by looking,” suggesting their awareness that appearance conveys vital information about fertility. Men’s preference for physically attractive mates is a species-wide psychological mechanism that transcends culture. Women too value appearance in a mate, as they should because appearance conveys health for both sexes, but they do not prioritize it as much as men.


