A Dangerous and Deadly Passion

Men’s sexual jealousy is neither a trivial nor a peripheral emotion in human life. It sometimes becomes so powerful that it causes the person who experiences it to kill a mate or an interloper. In one case a wife killing was apparently fueled by an awareness of the reproductive damage of cuckoldry, as the husband explained:

You see, we were always arguing about her extramarital affairs. That day was something more than that. I came home from work and as soon as I entered the house I picked up my little daughter and held her in my arms. Then my wife turned around and said to me: “You are so damned stupid that you don’t even know she is someone else’s child and not yours.” I was shocked! I became so mad. I took the rifle and shot her.61

A wife’s infidelity is sometimes viewed as so extreme a provocation that a “reasonable man” may legally respond with lethal violence. In Texas until 1974, for example, it was legal for a husband to kill his wife and her lover if he did so while the adulterers were engaging in the act of intercourse; their murder was considered a reasonable response to a powerful provocation. Laws exonerating men from killing adulterous wives are found worldwide and throughout human history. Among the Yaps, for example, rules permit husbands to kill wives and their lovers and to burn them up in the house if caught in the act of adultery. Similar provisions are made for offended husbands among the Toba-Batak of Sumatra. Old Roman law granted the husband the right to kill only if the adultery occurred in his own house, and similar laws remain in effect in some European countries today.62

Male sexual jealousy is the single most frequent cause of all types of violence directed at wives, including physical abuse and actual murder. In one study of forty-four physically abused wives seeking refuge, 55 percent stated that jealousy was their husband’s key motive for assaulting them.63 Sexual jealousy is a major motive for murder. In a study of homicides among the Tiv, Soga, Gisu, Nyoro, Luyhia, and Luo in British colonial Africa, of seventy murders of wives by their husbands, 46 percent were explicitly over sexual matters, including adultery, the woman’s abandonment of the husband, and the woman’s refusal of sex with the husband.64

Many of the homicides perpetrated by women also appear to have male sexual jealousy at their root. Women who kill men frequently do so to defend themselves against an enraged, threatening, and abusive husband from whom they fear bodily harm. In a sample of forty-seven homicide cases precipitated by a jealous man, sixteen women were killed by men for real or suspected infidelity, seventeen male rivals were killed by enraged men, and nine men were killed in self-defense by women whom the men had accused of infidelity.65

Homicidal jealousy is by no means limited to American or even to Western cultures. Sexual jealousy is a leading motive behind homicide in Sudan, Uganda, and India.66 One study in the Sudan, for example, found that the leading motive for 74 of 300 male-perpetrated murders was sexual jealousy.67 Most cases of spousal homicide in every society studied are apparently precipitated by male accusations of adultery or by the woman’s leaving or threatening to leave the husband. Furthermore, about 20 percent of the homicides of men by men have as their motive rivalry over a woman or offense taken at advances made to a spouse, daughter, or female relative.68

The adaptive functions of jealousy to prevent infidelity and ensure paternity are hard to reconcile with the seemingly maladaptive act of killing one’s wife, which interferes with reproductive success by destroying a key reproductive resource. There are several possible explanations. Because the overwhelming majority of unfaithful wives are not killed, the actual killing of a wife might represent an accidental slip of the adaptation, in which violent jealousy becomes pathological, is carried too far, and intentionally or accidentally results in death.69 Although this explanation fits some cases of wife killing, it does not square with the seeming intentionality of the many men who acknowledge that they intended to kill their partner and even hunted the woman down to do so.

An alternative explanation is that the killings that stem from jealousy represent extreme but nonetheless evolved manifestations of the adaptation. Killing one’s wife would not necessarily have been reproductively damaging under all conditions during human evolutionary history. In the first place, if a wife is going to abandon her husband, not only will he lose her reproductive resources anyway, but he also may suffer the additional cost of finding that those resources are channeled to a competitor, which is a double blow to relative reproductive success.

Men who allow themselves to be cuckolded are subject to ridicule and damage to their reputation, especially if they take no retaliatory action. In a polygynous marriage, for example, killing an unfaithful wife might salvage a man’s honor and also serve as a powerful deterrent to infidelity by his other wives. Polygynous men who took no action may have risked being cuckolded with impunity in the future. In some circumstances in our evolutionary past, killing a wife may have represented an effort at damage containment designed to stop the hemorrhaging of reproductive resources.

In the face of the conflicting costs and benefits of homicide, it is reasonable to speculate that, in some circumstances, killing a spouse who was unfaithful or was determined to leave would have been reproductively more beneficial than allowing oneself to be cuckolded or abandoned with impunity. Thoughts of killing and occasional actual killings may have been adaptive over human evolutionary history and hence may be part of men’s evolved psychological machinery. This is a horrifying possibility and obviously does not justify or excuse murder, but if society is ever going to grapple successfully with the serious problem of spousal homicide, it must confront the psychological mechanisms that give rise to it, especially the circumstances that activate violent adaptations and make them especially dangerous.


