Changes in Frequency of Extramarital Affairs

As men’s intense mate guarding lessens, women become less constrained by their husbands in their sexual behavior with other men. It has been said in a humorous vein that “monogamy is the Western custom of one wife and hardly any mistresses.”18 Reliable information on extramarital affairs is difficult to come by. The question on this subject caused more people to decline to participate in Alfred Kinsey’s study of sex than did any other question, and more of those who did participate refused to answer it than any other question. A shroud of secrecy surrounds extramarital sex, despite the multitude of studies on the subject.

The statistics on the incidence of extramarital sex must therefore be regarded as conservative, in that extramarital affairs tend to be underreported. The Kinsey report suggested that the actual incidence of affairs is probably at least 10 percent higher than reported.19 Another study of 750 spouses found that the incidence may be even higher. Whereas only 30 percent of these people initially admitted to extramarital affairs, under subsequent intensive questioning an additional 30 percent revealed that they had had extramarital sex, bringing the total to approximately 60 percent.20

Women’s extramarital affairs change dramatically with age. Affairs are rare among the youngest wives, being acknowledged by only 6 percent of wives at ages sixteen to twenty and about 9 percent at ages twenty-one to twenty-five. The incidence of extramarital affairs goes up to 14 percent of women at ages twenty-six to thirty and hits a peak of 17 percent of women between ages thirty-one and forty. After the late thirties and early forties, extramarital sex by women declines steadily, being acknowledged by 6 percent of women at ages fifty-one to fifty-five and only 4 percent of them at ages fifty-six to sixty. Thus, there is a curvilinear relationship between age and affairs for women: women have few affairs when they are both most and least reproductively valuable, but many more toward the end of their reproductive years.

A similar curvilinear age trend is found for women’s orgasms from extramarital affairs. Kinsey tabulated the percentage of women’s total sexual activity to orgasm, whatever the source, including marital sex, masturbation, and affairs. Women’s orgasms from extramarital affairs represent only 3 percent of women’s total orgasms between ages twenty-one and twenty-five, nearly triple to 11 percent toward the end of women’s reproductive years at ages thirty-six to forty-five, and drop again to only 4 percent after menopause from ages fifty-six to sixty.

There may be several reasons for why women’s extramarital affairs and orgasms peak toward the end of their reproductive years. Women at this time are guarded less intensely by their husbands and thus are better able to take advantage of existing sexual opportunities than more heavily guarded younger women. Older women also suffer fewer costs inflicted at the hands of a jealous husband, and therefore the deterrents to a tempting extramarital involvement might be less powerful.21 Because the penalties for being caught are lower, older women may feel freer to pursue their extramarital desires. They may also be attempting to produce one last child before their fertility drops to zero—a phenomenon that evolutionary psychologist Judith Easton has called reproduction expediting.22 Support for the reproduction expediting explanation also comes from the fact that women experience a surge in sexual fantasies and sex drive as they enter their thirties and the proverbial biological clock starts to tick more loudly.

Affairs may also signal an effort by women to switch mates before their own reproductive value has plummeted. Support for this idea comes from a study of 205 married individuals who had affairs. Fully 72 percent of women but only 51 percent of men were motivated by emotional commitment or long-term love rather than sexual desires in their extramarital dalliances.23 Another study found that men who had affairs were twice as likely as women to think of the involvement as purely sexual, devoid of emotional attachments.24 Yet another study found that only 33 percent of women who had affairs believed that their marriages were happy, whereas 56 percent of men who had extramarital sex considered their marriages to be happy.25 More men than women who are happily married can engage in extramarital sex without emotional involvement and without feeling that their marriages are unsatisfactory. The fact that women who have affairs are more likely to be unhappy in their marriages and more likely to be emotionally involved with the extramarital partner suggests that they may be using their affairs for the purpose of changing mates.

Men’s patterns of extramarital sex differ from those of women. Men engage in sex outside marriage both more often and more consistently than women over their lifetime. The desires of married people provide a window on men’s greater desire for extramarital sex. In one study, 48 percent of American men expressed a desire to engage in extramarital sex; the comparable figure for women was only 5 percent.26 In another study of marital happiness among 769 American men and 770 American women, 72 percent of men, but only 27 percent of women, admitted that they sometimes experienced a desire for extramarital intercourse.27 A study of working-class Germans reveals similar tendencies: 46 percent of married men but only 6 percent of married women acknowledged that they would take advantage of a casual sexual opportunity with someone attractive if it was provided.28

These desires often translate into actual affairs. In the Kinsey report on the lifetime incidence of extramarital coitus from age sixteen through age sixty, affairs by husbands surpassed those by wives at every age.29 Fully 37 percent of married men in the youngest age bracket of sixteen to twenty reported at least one affair, in contrast to a mere 6 percent of comparably aged wives. The incidence of affairs by husbands remained relatively constant over the years, with only a slight downward trend in the later years.

These affairs are not occasional trifles. Instead, affairs make up a significant proportion of men’s sexual outlets at every age throughout their life. Extramarital sex comprises about one-fifth of these men’s sexual outlets between ages sixteen and thirty-five. It rises steadily to 26 percent at ages thirty-six to forty, 30 percent at ages forty-one to forty-five, and 35 percent at ages forty-six to fifty.30 For men who engage in extramarital sex with companions and prostitutes, these forms of sex become increasingly important with age and occur at the expense of sex with their wives, which becomes a smaller and smaller fraction of their total. Given our knowledge of men’s evolved sexual psychology, these patterns reflect boredom on the part of both spouses at repeating sex with the same person or the decreasing sexual attractiveness of wives to their husbands as a result of their increasing age.

The proportion of men and women who have affairs over their lifetime depends on the culture’s mating system. In polygamous cultures, for example, where many men are left mateless and most fertile women are married, the percentages of men and women having affairs would naturally be different from the percentages in presumptively monogamous societies. Bachelors who seek sex have only married women to choose from. Furthermore, it is historically and cross-culturally common for a few high-ranking men to cuckold a large number of low-ranking men, as when Roman emperors such as Julius Caesar were permitted by law to have sex with other men’s wives.31 Under these conditions, the percentage of women having affairs would necessarily be greater than the percentage of men having affairs.

The main point about our evolved sexual strategies is not that men inevitably have more affairs than women or that infidelity is invariably expressed in men’s behavior. Rather, men’s sexual psychology disposes them to seek sexual variety, and men seek extramarital sex when the costs and risks are low. Some women also seek short-term sex, including extramarital sex, and these affairs may serve reproduction-expediting or mate-switching functions. Nonetheless, it is also true that women’s desires, fantasies, and motivations for this form of sex are less intense on average than are men’s. Mark Twain observed that “many men are goats and can’t help committing adultery when they get a chance; whereas there are numbers of men who, by temperament, can keep their purity and let an opportunity go by if the woman lacks in attractiveness.”32 Extramarital sex remains a larger component of men’s desires than women’s throughout their lives, although many men refrain from translating that desire into infidelity.


