—DONALD SYMONS, “What Do Men Want?”

WHY MEN WOULD ever commit to just one woman poses a puzzle. Since all an ancestral man needed to do to reproduce was to impregnate a woman, casual sex without commitment would have achieved this goal. For evolution to produce men who desire commitment or marriage and who are willing to devote years of investment to one woman, powerful adaptive advantages to that strategy over one of seeking casual sex, at least under some circumstances, must have been present.

One solution to this puzzle comes from the ground rules set by women. Since it is clear that many ancestral women required reliable signs of male commitment before consenting to sex, men who failed to commit would have suffered on the mating market. They might have failed to attract any women at all. Or perhaps they failed to attract the more desirable women and had to settle for those lower in mate value. Women’s requirements for consenting to sex made it costly for most men to pursue a short-term mating strategy exclusively. In the economics of reproductive effort, the costs of not pursuing a long-term mate would have been prohibitively high for most men, and men would have benefited as their odds of attracting a mate, as well as attracting a more desirable mate, increased with their willingness to commit.

Another way in which men benefited from sustained commitment to one woman was by increasing the odds that he would be the father of any children she bore—upping his probability of genetic paternity. By committing for the long term, men typically gained repeated and exclusive sexual access, and their close proximity put them in a position to fend off potential mate poachers. Without commitment, repeated sex became questionable and paternity more uncertain.

A further benefit of committing to one woman was the increased survival and reproductive success of the man’s children. In human ancestral environments, infants and young children were more likely to die without sustained investment from two parents or related kin.1 Among the Ache of Paraguay, for example, when a man dies in a club fight, the other villagers often make a collective decision to kill his children, even when the children have a living mother. In one case reported by the anthropologist Kim Hill, a boy of thirteen was killed after his father had died in a club fight. Overall, Ache children whose fathers die suffer a death rate more than 10 percent higher than children whose fathers remain alive.

Over human evolutionary history, even children who did survive without the father’s investment would have suffered by missing out on the knowledge he could impart and the political alliances he could bestow. Both of these assets help solve mating problems later in life. Fathers in many cultures past and present have a strong hand in arranging beneficial marriages for their sons and daughters.2 The absence of these benefits challenges the evolutionary fitness of children without fathers. These evolutionary pressures, operating over thousands of generations, gave an advantage to men who pursued a long-term strategy of commitment.

The economics of the mating marketplace typically produces an asymmetry between the sexes in their ability to obtain a desirable mate in a committed as opposed to a temporary relationship.3 Most men can obtain a much more desirable mate if they are willing to commit to a long-term relationship because women typically desire a lasting commitment, and highly desirable women are in the best position to get what they want. In contrast, most women can obtain a much more desirable casual partner by offering sex without requiring commitment, since high-status men are willing to relax their standards and have sex with a variety of women if the short-term hookup carries no commitment. High-status men impose more stringent standards for a partner to whom they are willing to commit.

Men also gain in two other ways by committing. One is an increase in social status. In many cultures, males are not considered “real men” until they have married. Increased status, of course, brings a man other bounties, including better resources for his children and sometimes an increased attractiveness to additional mates. A final benefit of commitment or marriage is the formation of a more expansive coalitional network that includes his spouse’s friends and kin. Men, in short, have much to gain by committing to one woman.

Much of what men want in a long-term mate coincides with what women want. Like women, men want committed partners who are intelligent, kind, dependable, emotionally stable, and healthy. For men as well as for women, these qualities are linked with mates who will make excellent partners, excellent allies, and excellent parents. These qualities could also signal good genetic material and low mutation loads, that is fewer copying errors within the partner’s genome—qualities that make for healthier and more robust children.

But men face an adaptive problem not faced by women, at least not as poignantly—choosing a fertile partner. To be reproductively successful, the most obvious criterion would be a woman’s ability to bear children. A woman with high reproductive capacity would be extremely valuable in evolutionary currencies. Men need some basis, however, on which to judge a woman’s reproductive capacity.

The solution to this problem is diabolically difficult. Ancestral men had few obvious aids for figuring out which women possessed the highest reproductive value. A woman’s fertility is not stamped on her forehead or advertised with flashing neon signs. It cannot be observed directly, and it is not imbued in her social reputation. Her family is clueless. Even women themselves lack direct knowledge of their reproductive value.

The adaptive problem of detecting which women are fertile comes into clear view when we consider chimpanzees, our closest primate relatives. When a female chimp is fertile, she goes into an estrus phase. Her genitals become engorged, creating bright red swellings that are indeed somewhat like neon signs in their visibility. She emits ovulatory scents at ovulation. These estrus signals send male chimps into a sexual frenzy. To make it even easier on these male chimps, estrus females often energetically solicit sex, “presenting” themselves to males they prefer. Men do not have it this easy. Although there are subtle changes that women undergo when ovulating, such as a slight lightening of their skin and a slight rise in voice pitch, women have nothing approaching the vivid visible ovulation signals emitted by female chimps. Over evolutionary history, vivid signs of human ovulation were largely driven underground, irrevocably changing the ground rules of mating.

A preference nevertheless evolved for fertility. Ancestral men evolved mechanisms to sense cues to a woman’s underlying reproductive value, and two obvious and observable cues were youth and health.4 Old or unhealthy women clearly could not reproduce as much as young, healthy women. Ancestral men solved the problem of finding reproductively valuable women in part by preferring those who were young and healthy. But how can youth and health be discerned?


