Body Shape

Facial beauty is only part of the picture. Features of the rest of the body provide abundant cues to a woman’s reproductive capacity. Standards for bodily beauty vary somewhat from culture to culture, along such dimensions as a plump versus slim body build or light versus dark skin. Emphasis on particular physical features, such as eyes, ears, buttocks, or genitals, also varies by culture. Some cultures, such as the Nama, a branch of Hottentots residing in southwest Africa, consider an elongated labia majora to be sexually attractive, and they work at pulling and manipulating the vulvar lips to enhance attractiveness. Men in many cultures prefer large, firm breasts, but in a few, such as the Azande of eastern Sudan and the Ganda of Uganda, men are reported to view long, pendulous breasts as the more attractive.24

The most culturally variable standard of beauty seems to be in the preference for a slim versus plump body build. This variation is linked partly with the social status that body build conveys. In cultures where food is scarce, such as among the Bushmen of Australia, plumpness signals wealth, health, and adequate nutrition during development.25 In cultures where food is relatively abundant, such as the United States and many western European countries, the relationship between plumpness and status is reversed and the rich signal their status through relative thinness.26 Men apparently do not have an evolved preference for a particular amount of body fat per se. Rather, they have an evolved preference for whatever features are linked with status, which vary in predictable ways from culture to culture. Clearly such a preference does not require conscious calculation or awareness.

Studies by the psychologist Paul Rozin and his colleagues have revealed a disturbing aspect of women’s and men’s perceptions of the desirability of plump versus thin body types.27 American men and women viewed nine female figures that varied from very thin to very plump. The women were asked to indicate their ideal for themselves, as well as their perception of men’s ideal for the female figure. In both cases, women selected a figure slimmer than average. When men were asked to select which female figure they preferred, however, they selected the figure of average body size. American women erroneously believe that men desire thinner women than they actually do prefer. These findings refute the belief that men desire women who are runway-model thin; most men do not.

While men’s preferences for a particular body size vary, one preference for body shape that is fairly invariant, the psychologist Devendra Singh discovered, is the preference for a small waist size relative to hip size.28 Before puberty, boys and girls show a similar fat distribution. At puberty, however, a dramatic change occurs. Boys lose fat from their buttocks and thighs, while the release of estrogens in pubertal girls causes them to deposit fat in their lower trunk, primarily on their hips and upper thighs. Indeed, the volume of body fat in this region is 40 percent greater for women than for men.

In other words, the waist-to-hip ratio is similar for the sexes before puberty, but after puberty women’s hip fat deposits cause their waist-to-hip ratio to become significantly lower than men’s. Healthy, reproductively capable women have a waist-to-hip ratio between 0.67 and 0.80, while healthy men have a ratio in the range of 0.85 to 0.95. Abundant evidence now shows that the waist-to-hip ratio is an accurate indicator of women’s reproductive status. Women with a lower ratio show earlier pubertal endocrine activity. Women with a higher ratio have more difficulty becoming pregnant, and those who do become pregnant do so at a later age than women with a lower ratio. The waist-to-hip ratio is also an accurate indication of long-term health status. Diseases such as diabetes, hypertension, heart problems, previous stroke, and gallbladder disorders are linked with the distribution of fat, as reflected by the ratio. The link between the waist-to-hip ratio and both health and reproductive status made it a reliable cue for ancestral men’s preferences in a mate.

Singh discovered that waist-to-hip ratio is indeed a powerful cue to women’s attractiveness. In a dozen studies conducted by Singh, men rated the attractiveness of female figures, which varied in both their waist-to-hip ratio and their total amount of fat. Men find the average figure to be more attractive than a thin or fat figure. Regardless of the total amount of fat, however, men find women with a low waist-to-hip ratio to be the most attractive. Women with a ratio 0.70 are more attractive than women with a ratio of 0.80, who in turn are more attractive than women with a ratio of 0.90. Finally, Singh’s analysis of Playboy centerfolds and winners of beauty contests in the United States over thirty consecutive years confirmed the invariance of this cue. Although both centerfolds and beauty contest winners got thinner, their waist-to-hip ratio remained roughly the same at around 0.70.

There is one more possible reason for the importance of waist-to-hip ratio. Pregnancy alters this ratio dramatically. A higher ratio mimics pregnancy and therefore may render women less attractive as mates or sexual partners. A lower ratio, in turn, signals health, reproductive capacity, and lack of current pregnancy. Men’s standards of female attractiveness have evolved over thousands of generations to detect and find attractive this reliable cue.


