The Fitness Signaling Hypothesis: Humor, Creativity, Art, Music, and Morality

Because women prefer mates who have a good sense of humor, men should display humor in their tactics of attraction.45 Humor has many facets, two of which are humor production (making witty remarks, telling jokes) and humor appreciation (laughing when someone else produces humor). In long-term mating, women prefer men who produce humor, whereas men prefer women who are receptive to their humor.46 Precisely why do women value humor in a mate? One theory is that displaying humor signals interest in initiating and maintaining a mating relationship.47 This theory predicts that humor signals long-term intentions and commitment cues toward a specific person. Making someone laugh and appreciating their humor convey excellent mind-reading abilities, perspective taking, playfulness, verbal adeptness, mutual compatibility, and good long-term mate potential. Not everyone is convinced, however, that humor is really important in mate attraction. The comedian Jimi McFarland noted: “One of the things women claim is most important in a man is a sense of humor. In my years as a comedian, I’ve learned that they’re usually referring to the humor of guys like Brad Pitt, Tom Cruise, and Russell Crowe. Apparently, those guys are hilarious.”

Another theory proposes that humor is a cue that its user possesses good genes, a fitness indicator signaling excellent functioning of complex cognitive skills unimpaired by a high mutation load.48 According to Geoffrey Miller’s fitness signaling hypothesis, humor is one among an array of uniquely human abilities that convey genetic quality to a potential mate. Others include high verbal dexterity (a large and fluent vocabulary and facility with language and its nuances), intelligence, artistic ability, musicality, and creativity. Even displaying moral virtues such as honesty, cooperativeness, fairness, and conscientiousness can be signals. The fitness signaling hypothesis draws an analogy with the peacock’s tail—the tail is flashy, cumbersome, and costly, but only peacocks in the best condition, those with the highest fitness, can afford to produce these mesmerizing displays. High mutation and parasite loads, for example, dull the plumages’ luminescence. Peacocks do no investing in peahens, nor do they aid offspring, so the only benefits these males can provide are good-quality genes. Females who sexually select males with the best genes bear offspring who are healthier in the next generation, have sons who inherit qualities that will make them attractive to females, and have daughters who inherit the female sexual preference. That is, the daughters will, in turn, choose mates with genes that confer high fitness on their own offspring.

The fitness signaling theory builds on the work of prior evolutionists, such as the geneticist R. A. Fisher and the biologist Amotz Zahavi. For fitness signals to be reliable and honest, Zahavi argues, they must be costly to produce.49 If they were easy and metabolically cheap to generate, then every individual would do so. It is precisely their costliness that makes them honest signals of genetic quality. Miller argues that the same logic applies to creative, artistic, musical, and intellectual displays in the context of courtship. These abilities confer no direct survival benefit, but do convey cues to genetic quality. They evolved, Miller contends, through a process of mutual mate choice in which men and women both exhibited high levels of choosiness in selecting mates. And indeed, men and women are quite similar in their intelligence, musical abilities, creativity, and many other qualities.

Although humans have unquestionably evolved through mutual mate choice, as I have argued throughout this book, and the genetic quality of mates is undoubtedly part of that picture (for example, the sexy son hypothesis), critics of the fitness signaling hypothesis have identified some problems with this explanation for the evolution of music, art, humor, and so on. The evolutionary psychologist Steven Pinker, for example, argues that there are no specific adaptations for art, music, literature, and the like. Rather, they are nonfunctional by-products of adaptations that evolved for other purposes and allow humans to take pleasure in “shapes and colors and sounds and jokes and stories and myths.”50 Creating paintings that mimic the color patterns present in fruit, for example, can pleasurably activate an adaptation of color vision designed for locating ripe fruit. Pinker argues that music is “auditory cheesecake, an exquisite confection crafted to tickle the sensitive spots of at least six of our mental faculties.”51 So rather than being costly fitness signals that are displayed for mate attraction, human artistic and musical abilities may simply be by-products of adaptations that evolved for other functions.

Another criticism of the fitness signaling hypothesis is that some of the qualities it is designed to explain, such as intelligence and morality, do have compelling adaptive functions beyond merely serving as cues to genetic quality. Consider intelligence, which is linked with good resource acquisition skills, good parenting skills, prescience in forecasting danger, good health practices, and capacity to acquire and skillfully use cultural knowledge. Selecting an intelligent mate confers this bounty of adaptive benefits on oneself and one’s children. The genetic benefits that intelligence provides to offspring may be important as well, but it seems rash to discount how intelligence helps to solve a host of adaptive problems linked with enabling the mate selector and children to survive and thrive. Displays of morality, undoubtedly important in attracting a mate, also signal that one will be a good and generous partner, a good and fair cooperator, a self-sacrificing parent, and a high-quality long-term ally—all qualities that directly solve practical adaptive problems.

A third set of problems with the fitness signaling hypothesis centers on its testability and its ability to lead to new discoveries previously unknown. The hypothesis runs into trouble in explaining sex-differentiated qualities. If both men and women are choosing the same fitness indicators, why do women value humor production in potential mates, for example, while men value humor appreciation in potential mates? Some critics argue that the fitness signaling hypothesis is an after-the-fact explanation for phenomena that are widely known—that people tell jokes and find things funny, display moral qualities in public, devote seemingly wasteful time producing music and art, and so on. They contend that it has not led to novel empirical discoveries, one of the key criteria for evaluating scientific hypotheses. Nonetheless, the fitness signaling hypothesis does focus greater attention on genetic quality in mate selection, which historically has been relatively neglected. And it might turn out to be an important addition to the theoretical tools that evolutionary psychologists possess to explain the complexities of human mate attraction.


