Competition and Conflict in the Mating Arena

An unpleasant fact of human mating is that desirable people are always outnumbered by the many who desire them. Some men demonstrate a superior ability to accrue resources, have a more appealing body type, or are more highly skilled at ascending status hierarchies. Because women typically desire these men, they compete with each other to attract them. Only women high in mate value, however, succeed. Women of striking beauty are desired by many men, but only a few men prosper in attracting them. The qualities of kindness, intelligence, dependability, athleticism, looks, and economic prospects are all present in the same person only rarely. Most of us must settle for someone who has less than the full complement of desirable qualities.

These stark facts create competition and conflict within each gender that can be avoided only by opting out of the mating game entirely. The fundamental desires of mating, however, are not easily extinguished. The quest to fulfill these desires catapults people headlong into the arena of competition. People do not always recognize competition in its many guises. A man or woman buying the latest facial cream may not construe this attention to skin as competition. A woman or man participating in the latest fitness craze or working late into the night may not construe these actions as competition. But as long as people have mating desires and as long as people differ in the qualities desired, competition will be an inevitable aspect of human mating.

Conflict between the sexes is likewise not easily extinguished. Some men show a thoughtless insensitivity to women’s sexual psychology. Men sometimes seek sex sooner, more frequently, more persistently, or more aggressively than women want. Charges of sexual harassment and coercion are almost exclusively levied by women against men because of fundamental differences in the mating strategies of the two sexes. Men’s strategies conflict with women’s desires, causing anger and distress. Analogously, women spurn men who lack the desired qualities, causing frustration and resentment among the men who are rejected. Women interfere with men’s sexual strategies as much as men interfere with women’s, although perhaps they do so in less brutal and coercive ways.

Conflict within couples is also impossible to eliminate entirely. Although some couples live harmonious, happy lives together, no couple experiences a complete absence of conflict. The conditions that trigger conflict are often unavoidable. A man who gets fired from his job because of factors beyond his control may find that his wife wants a divorce because he no longer provides the resources on which she partly based her mating decision. A woman with encroaching wrinkles, through no fault of her own, may find that her professionally successful husband desires a younger woman. Some conflict between the sexes is impossible to eliminate because the conditions that foster it cannot be avoided.

The fact that conflicts between men and women originate from our evolved mating psychology is disturbing to some people, partly because it contradicts widely held beliefs. Many of us have learned the traditional view that these conflicts are reflections of a particular culture whose practices perturb the natural harmony of human nature. But the anger that women feel when sexually coerced and the rage that men feel when cuckolded arise from our evolved mating strategies, not from capitalism, culture, patriarchy, or socialization. Evolution operates by the ruthless criterion of reproductive success, no matter how repugnant we may find the strategies produced by that process, and no matter how abhorrent the consequences of those strategies may be.

An especially destructive manifestation of conflict between members of the same gender is warfare, a recurrent activity throughout human history. Given men’s tendency to take physical risks in their pursuit of the resources needed for success at mating, it comes as no surprise that warfare is almost exclusively a male activity. Among the Yanomamö, there are two key motives that spur men to declare war on another tribe—a desire to capture the wives of other men and a desire to recapture wives that were lost in previous raids. When the American anthropologist Napoleon Chagnon explained to his Yanomamö informants that the United States waged war for principles such as freedom and democracy, they were astonished. It seemed absurd to them to risk one’s life for anything other than capturing or recapturing women.20

The frequency of rape during wars throughout the course of human recorded history suggests that the sexual motives of the Yanomamö men may not be atypical.21 Men worldwide share the same evolved psychology. The fact that there has never in history been a single case of women forming a war party to raid neighboring villages and capture husbands tells us something important about the nature of gender differences—that men’s mating strategies are often more violent than women’s.22 The sexual motivation underlying violence also reveals that conflict within a sex is closely connected to conflict between the sexes. Men wage war to kill other men, but women become sexual victims.

In everyday life in modern society, the battle between the genders occurs between individual men and women interacting with each other socially—in the workplace, at parties, on online dating sites, and at home. The selective exclusion of mates, for example, does not affect all people, only those who lack the desired characteristics. Sexual jealousy is a cost inflicted not by all men on all women but rather by particular men, such as those lower in desirability than their partners, in particular circumstances, such as instances of infidelity, on particular women, such as spouses rather than casual sex partners. Sexual coercion, to take another example, is perpetrated only by some men, notably those with the sociopathic traits of low empathy, high hostility, hypermasculinity, and exploitative predispositions. Most men are not rapists, and most would be unlikely to commit rape even if there were no risk of getting caught.23

There is no solidarity among all men or all women that creates conflict between the sexes. Rather, members of each gender generally favor a common set of strategies that differ in some respects from the strategies pursued by members of the other sex. It is possible to speak of conflict between the sexes because the ways in which men and women typically conflict result from the strategies they have in common with their own sex. Still, we must recognize that no man or woman is fundamentally united with his or her own gender, nor fundamentally at odds with members of the other gender.

We are empowered now, more than at any time in human evolutionary history, to shape our future. The fact that deception, coercion, and abuse stem from our mating strategies does not justify their perpetuation. By employing the evolved mechanisms that are sensitive to personal costs, such as our sensitivity to reputational damage and our fear of ostracism, we may be able to curtail the expression of the more damaging aspects of our mating strategies.


