Do Women’s Desires Change When They Have Power and Resources?

Many years ago, I offered a different possible explanation for women’s preferences for men with resources, based on the so-called structural powerlessness and sex-role socialization of women.68 According to this view, because women are typically excluded from power and access to resources, which are largely controlled by men, women seek mates who have power, status, and earning capacity. Women try to marry upward in socioeconomic status to gain access to resources. Men do not value economic resources in a mate as much as women do because men already have control over these resources and because women have fewer resources anyway.

The society of Bakweri, from Cameroon in West Africa, casts doubt on this theory by illustrating what happens when women have real power. Bakweri women hold greater personal and economic power because they have more resources and are in scarcer supply than men.69 Women secure resources through their own labors on plantations, but also from casual sex, which is a lucrative source of income. There are roughly 236 men for every 100 women, an imbalance that results from the continual influx of men from other areas of the country to work on the plantations. Because of the extreme imbalance in numbers of the sexes, women have more money than men and more potential mates to choose from. Yet despite this greater latitude, Bakweri women persist in preferring to have a mate with resources. Wives often complain about receiving insufficient support from their husbands. Indeed, lack of sufficient economic provisioning is the most frequently cited divorce complaint of women. Bakweri women change husbands if they find a man who can offer them more money and pay a larger bride price. When women are in a position to fulfill their evolved preference for a man with resources, they do so. Having the dominant control of economic resources does not diminish this key mate preference.

Professionally and economically successful women in the United States also value resources in men. My lab’s newlywed study identified women who were financially successful, measured by their salary and income, and contrasted their preferences in a mate with those of women with lower salaries and income. Many of the financially successful women earned more than $100,000 per year in today’s dollars. These women were well educated, tended to have professional degrees, and had high self-esteem. Perhaps surprisingly, the study showed that successful women place an even greater value than less successful women on mates who have professional degrees, high social status, and greater intelligence, as well as desiring mates who are tall, independent, and self-confident. These women also express an even stronger preference for high-earning men than do women who are less financially successful. In a separate study the psychologists Michael Wiederman and Elizabeth Allgeier found that college women who expected to earn the most after college placed more importance on the financial prospects of a potential husband than did women who expected to earn less. Professionally successful women, such as medical students and law students, also assigned great importance to a mate’s earning capacity.70 Furthermore, men who were low in financial resources and status did not value economic resources in a mate any more than financially successful men did.71

Cross-cultural studies also find that women with their own economic resources value resources in a potential mate more, not less, than women lacking these resources. A study of 1,670 Spanish women found that high-resource women wanted mates with more status and more resources.72 A study of 288 Jordanians found the same thing, as did a study of 127 Serbians and an Internet study of 1,851 English women.73 Taken together, these results not only fail to support the structural powerlessness or sex-role hypothesis but directly contradict it.

Structural powerlessness has an element of truth in that men in many cultures do control resources and sometimes do exclude women from power. But the theory cannot explain several facts: men strive to exclude other men from power at least as much as they do women; the origins of the male motivation to control resources remain unexplained; women have not evolved bigger, stronger bodies to acquire resources directly; and men’s preferences in a mate remain entirely mysterious. Evolutionary psychology accounts for this constellation of findings. Men strive to control resources and to exclude other men from resources to fulfill women’s mating preferences. In human evolutionary history, men who failed to accumulate resources failed to attract mates. Men’s more powerful status and resource acquisition drives are due, at least in part, to the preferences that women have expressed over the past few million years. To paraphrase the evolutionary anthropologist Sarah Hrdy, “Men are one long breeding experiment run by women.”


