Cooperation Between the Sexes

Men and women have always depended on each other for transporting their genes to future generations. Committed mateships are characterized by a complex web of long-term trust and reciprocity that appears to be unparalleled in other species. In this sense, cooperation between the sexes reaches a pinnacle among humans. Our strategies for cooperation in mating define human nature as much as our evolved capacity for language and culture.

Sexual strategies provide us with some of the conditions that facilitate the achievement of lifelong love. Children, the shared vehicles by which genes survive the journey to future generations, align the interests of a man and a woman and foster enduring mating bonds. Parents share in the delights of producing new life and nurturing their children to maturity. They marvel together as the gift of their union partakes of life’s reproductive cycle. But children also create new sources of conflict, from disputes about dividing the child care to reduced opportunities for nighttime sexual harmony. No blessing is unmixed.

Sexual fidelity also promotes marital harmony. Any possibility of infidelity opens up a chasm of conflicting interests. Infidelity disrupts mating bonds and leads to breakups. Monogamy encourages prolonged trust between a man and a woman. If a woman is unfaithful, she may benefit by obtaining extra material resources, better genes to pass on to her children, or opportunities to trade up in the mating market. But the benefits that flow to her through infidelity come at a cost to her husband in a reduced certainty of paternity, a destruction of trust, and the potential long-term loss of his mate. A man’s infidelity may satisfy his lust for sexual variety or give him a momentary euphoria that mimics that of a polygynous man. But these benefits come at a cost to his wife as a portion of her husband’s love and investment is diverted to a rival. Lifelong sexual fidelity promotes harmony between a man and a woman, but it comes at a price for both in sacrificed external mating opportunities.

Fulfilling each other’s evolved desires is one key to harmony between a man and woman. A woman’s happiness increases when the man brings more economic resources to the union and shows kindness, affection, and commitment. A man’s happiness increases when the woman is more physically attractive than he is, and when she shows kindness, affection, and commitment.24 Those who fulfill each other’s desires have happier relationships, especially if there are no interested others in the mating pool who could fulfill them more completely. Our evolved desires, in short, provide the essential ingredients for solving the mystery of mating harmony.

Knowledge of the multiplicity of our desires may be the most powerful tool for promoting harmony. It is a crowning achievement of humankind that two unrelated individuals can bring all of their individual resources into a lifelong alliance characterized by the remarkable emotion of love. This happens because of the tremendous resources that each person brings to the relationship, the bounty of benefits that flow to those who cooperate, and the sophisticated psychological machinery that we have for forming enduringly valuable mateships. Some of these resources tend to be linked to a person’s gender, such as a woman’s reproductive viability or a man’s physical provisioning capacity. But mating resources typically transcend these reproductive essentials to include such capacities as protection from danger, deterrence of enemies, formation of friendships, tutoring of children, loyalty through thin and thick, and nurturance in times of setback. Each of these resources fulfills one of the many special desires that define our human nature.

A profound respect for the other gender should come from the knowledge that we have always depended on each other for the resources required for survival and reproduction. We have always depended on each other for the fulfillment of our desires. These facts may be responsible for the unique feeling of completeness that people experience when they become entwined in the intoxicating grip of love. A lifelong alliance of love is a triumphant achievement of human mating strategies.

Today we are confronted with novel sexual circumstances not encountered by any of our ancestors, including reliable contraception, fertility drugs, artificial insemination, cyber sex, online dating apps, breast implants, tummy tucks, sperm banks, and the capacity to genetically engineer “designer babies.” Our ability to control the consequences of our mating behavior is unprecedented in human evolutionary history and matched by no other species on earth. But we confront these modern novelties with an ancient set of mating strategies that worked in ancestral times and in places that are irretrievably lost. Our mating mechanisms are the living fossils that reveal who we are and where we came from.

We are the first species in the known history of three and a half billion years of life on earth with the capacity to control our own destiny. The prospect of designing our destiny remains excellent to the degree that we comprehend our evolutionary past. Only by examining the complex repertoire of human sexual strategies can we know where we came from. Only by understanding why these human strategies have evolved can we control where we are going.





