Sexual Fantasies

Sexual fantasies provide another psychological clue to men’s desire for low-commitment sex. One of several music videos targeted to adolescent men shows a male rock star cavorting across a beach strewn with dozens of beautiful bikini-clad women. Another shows a male rock star caressing the shapely legs of one woman after another as he sings. Yet another shows a rapper gazing at dozens of women who are wearing only underwear. Since these videos are designed to appeal to male audiences, the implication is clear. A prominent male sexual fantasy is to have sexual access to dozens of different young, beautiful women who respond eagerly and willingly.

Men’s and women’s sexual fantasies differ greatly. Studies from Japan, the United Kingdom, and the United States show that men have roughly twice as many sexual fantasies as women.34 In their sleep men are more likely than women to dream about sexual events. Men’s sexual fantasies more often include strangers, multiple partners, and anonymous partners. Most men report that during a single fantasy episode they sometimes change sexual partners; most women rarely change sex partners within one fantasy. In Hunt’s survey, 32 percent of men but only 8 percent of women reported having imagined sexual encounters with over 1,000 different partners in their lifetime. Fantasies about group sex occurred among 33 percent of the men but only 18 percent of the women.35 A typical male fantasy, as one man told another researcher, is having “six or more naked women licking, kissing, and fellating me.”36 Another man reported the fantasy of “being the mayor of a small town filled with nude girls from 20 to 24. I like to take walks, and pick out the best-looking one that day, and she engages in intercourse with me. All the women have sex with me any time I want.”37 Numbers and novelty are key ingredients of men’s fantasy lives.

Male fantasies are heavily visual, focusing on smooth skin and body parts, notably breasts, genitals, buttocks, legs, and mouths. During their sexual fantasies, 81 percent of men but only 43 percent of women focus on visual images rather than feelings. Attractive women with lots of exposed skin who show signs of easy access and no commitment are key components of men’s fantasies. As Bruce Ellis and Donald Symons observe, “The most striking feature of [male fantasy] is that sex is sheer lust and physical gratification, devoid of encumbering relationships, emotional elaboration, complicated plot lines, flirtation, courtship, and extended foreplay.”38 These fantasies reveal a psychology attuned to seeking sexual access to multiple partners.

Women’s sexual fantasies, in contrast, often contain familiar partners. Fifty-nine percent of American women but only 28 percent of American men reported that their sexual fantasies typically focused on someone with whom they were already romantically and sexually involved. Emotions and personality are crucial for women. Forty-one percent of the women but only 16 percent of the men reported that they focused most heavily on the personal and emotional characteristics of the fantasized partner. And 57 percent of women but only 19 percent of men reported that they focused on feelings as opposed to visual images. As one woman observed: “I usually think about the guy I am with. Sometimes I realize that the feelings will overwhelm me, envelop me, sweep me away.”39 Women emphasize tenderness, romance, and personal involvement in their sexual fantasies. They also pay more attention to how their partner responds to them than to visual images of the partner.40


