Sexual Orientation and Mate Preferences

The premium that men place on a mate’s appearance is not limited to heterosexuals. Some scientists contend that same-sex relationships provide an acid test for the evolutionary basis of sex differences in the desires for a mate.38 Do gay men show preferences more or less like those of other men, differing only in the sex of the person they desire? Do they show preferences similar to those of women? Or do they have unique preferences unlike the typical preferences of either sex?

No one knows the exact percentage of homosexuals in any culture, past or present. Part of the difficulty lies with definitions. The sexologist Alfred Kinsey estimated that more than one-third of all men engage at some point in life in some form of homosexual activity, typically as part of adolescent experimentation. Far fewer people, however, express a strong preference for the same sex as a mate. Most estimates put the figure at about 3 to 4 percent for men and 1 to 2 percent for women.39 The discrepancy between the percentages of people who have engaged in some kinds of homosexual acts and people who express a core preference for partners of the same sex suggests an important distinction between the underlying psychology of preference and the outward manifestation of behavior. Some men who prefer women as mates may nonetheless substitute a man as a sex partner, because of either circumstance or opportunity.

No one knows why some people have a strong preference for members of their own sex as mates, although this lack of knowledge has not held back speculation. One suggestion is the so-called kin selection theory of homosexuality, which holds that homosexuality evolved when some people served better as aides to their close genetic relatives than as reproducers.40 No current evidence exists to support this theory. Gay men do not invest more in their nephews and nieces than do heterosexual men. Other theories point to the mother’s intrauterine environment, birth order, and other nongenetic causes. If there exists one single large cause of sexual orientation, it is likely that scientists would know it by now. That the origins of homosexuality remain somewhat of a mystery suggests that the causes of sexual orientation are likely to be multiple and complex.

Homosexual preferences in a mate, in contrast, are far less mysterious. Studies document the great importance that homosexual men place on the youth and physical appearance of their partners. William Jankowiak and his colleagues asked homosexual and heterosexual individuals, both men and women, to rank sets of photographs of men and women differing in age on physical attractiveness.41 Gay and heterosexual men alike ranked the younger individuals as consistently more attractive. Neither lesbian nor heterosexual women, in contrast, placed any importance on youth in their ranking of attractiveness. These results suggest that lesbian women are very much like heterosexual women in their mate preferences, except with respect to the sex of the person they desire, and that homosexual men are similar to heterosexual men in their mate preferences.

The psychologists Kay Deaux and Randel Hanna conducted a systematic study of homosexual mate preferences.42 They collected 800 ads from several East Coast and West Coast newspapers, equally sampling male heterosexuals, female heterosexuals, gay men, and lesbians. Using a coding scheme, they calculated the frequency with which members of each of these groups offered and sought particular characteristics, such as physical attractiveness, financial security, and personality traits.

Lesbians tended to be similar to heterosexual women in placing little emphasis on physical appearance, with only 19.5 percent of the heterosexual women and 18 percent of the lesbians mentioning this quality. In contrast, 48 percent of heterosexual men and 29 percent of gay men stated that they were seeking attractive partners. Among all groups, lesbians listed their own physical attractiveness less often than any other group; such mentions appeared in only 30 percent of their ads. Heterosexual women, in contrast, offered attractiveness in 69.5 percent of the ads, gay men in 53.5 percent, and heterosexual men in 42.5 percent. Only 16 percent of the lesbians requested a photograph of respondents to their ads, whereas 35 percent of heterosexual women, 34.5 percent of gay men, and 37 percent of heterosexual men made this request.

Lesbian women are distinct from the other three groups in specifying fewer physical characteristics, such as weight, height, eye color, or body build. Whereas only 7 percent of lesbians mentioned their desire for specific physical attributes, 20 percent of heterosexual women, 38 percent of gay men, and 33.5 percent of heterosexual men requested particular physical traits. And as with overall attractiveness, lesbians stood out in that only 41.5 percent listed physical attributes among the assets they offered, whereas 64 percent of heterosexual women, 74 percent of gay men, and 71.5 percent of heterosexual men offered particular physical assets. It is clear that gay men are similar to heterosexual men in the premium they place on appearance. Lesbian women are more like heterosexual women in their desires, but differ in placing less value on physical qualities, both in their offerings and in the qualities they seek.

Less formal studies confirm the centrality of youth and physical appearance for male homosexuals. Surveys of the gay mating market consistently find that physical attractiveness is the key determinant of the desirability of a potential partner. Male homosexuals place great emphasis on dress, grooming, and physical condition. And youth is a key ingredient in judging attractiveness: “Age is the monster figure of the gay world.”43

The sociologists Philip Blumstein and Pepper Schwartz found that the physical beauty of a partner was critical to the desires of homosexual and heterosexual men more than to lesbian or heterosexual women, even among already coupled individuals.44 They found that 57 percent of gay men and 59 percent of heterosexual men felt that it was important that their partner be sexy-looking. In contrast, only 31 percent of the heterosexual women and 35 percent of the lesbian women stated that sexy looks were important in a partner. Male homosexuals and male heterosexuals seem to have similar mate preferences, except with respect to the sex of their preferred partner. Both place a premium on appearance, and youth and youthful features are central ingredients in their definition of beauty.


