Changes in Men’s Mate Value

While women’s desirability as mates declines predictably with age, the same does not apply to men’s. The reason is that many of the key qualities that contribute to a man’s value are not as closely or as predictably linked with age. These components include a man’s intelligence, cooperativeness, parenting proclivities, political alliances, kin networks, coalitions, and, importantly, ability and willingness to provide resources to a woman and her children.

Men’s value in supplying resources, indicated by cues such as income and social status, shows markedly different changes with age than women’s reproductive value. There are two important differences: men’s resources and social status typically peak much later in life than women’s reproductive value, and men differ more markedly from one another in the resources and social status they accrue. Men’s resources and status sometimes plummet, sometimes remain constant, and sometimes skyrocket with increasing age, whereas women’s reproductive value declines steadily and inexorably with age.

For men, a distinction must be drawn between social status and the accrual of resources to understand their lifetime value as mates. In ancestral hunter-gatherer societies, limited hunting capacities and the short shelf life of killed game constrained how much meat men could accumulate. Furthermore, men in current hunter-gatherer societies do not vary widely in the amount of land they hold or the amount of meat they store.43 Indeed, although men vary in hunting ability, some groups, such as the Ache of Paraguay, share their meat communally, so that individual men do not vary widely in the direct resources they derive from the hunt.

In societies where meat is shared communally, however, skillful hunters do experience a greater reproductive success than poor hunters. This can happen for two reasons. Men who are good hunters are attractive to women and consequently secure more extramarital matings than men who are poor hunters. Women prefer to have sex with the better hunters. The children of good hunters are better nurtured by other members of the group than are the children of poor hunters. Although Ache men do not vary in their meat resources per se, they do vary in their social status derived from hunting, which gives them sexual access to desirable women and better care for their children.44 Thus, status and resources are somewhat separate qualities.

The advent of agriculture roughly 10,000 to 15,000 years ago and the invention of cash economies permitted the stockpiling of resources far beyond what was possible among our hunter-gatherer ancestors. The differences in tangible resources between someone like Facebook founder Mark Zuckerberg and a homeless person are much greater than those between the highest-ranked head man among the Ache and the lowest-ranked older male who is no longer able to hunt. The same may not be true for social status. Although cash economies have amplified the differences in men’s resources, the status differences of contemporary men are not necessarily greater than the status differences among our ancestors.

Although social status is harder to measure than income, contemporary hunter-gatherer societies around the world provide clues to the distribution of social status by age. In no known culture do teenage boys enjoy the highest status. Among the Tiwi tribe, men are typically at least thirty years old—and often middle-aged—before they are in a position of sufficient status to acquire a wife or two.45 Young Tiwi men lack the political alliances to garner much status.

Among the !Kung, the decade of the twenties is spent refining skills and acquiring knowledge and wisdom about hunting.46 Not until a !Kung man is in his thirties does he come into his own in taking down large game for the group. Among the Ache of Paraguay, male prestige is also linked to hunting ability, which does not peak until the late twenties or early thirties and carries well into the late forties.47 Among both the !Kung and Ache, men older than sixty typically become unable to hunt successfully, stop carrying bows and arrows, and show a considerable decline in their political status and ability to attract younger wives. Status among the Ache males may peak somewhere between twenty-five and fifty, corresponding closely with their hunting prowess.48 Older Ache, Yanomamö, and Tiwi men command respect, status, and awe from younger men because they have survived so many club fights, spear fights, and ax fights. Men maintain status well into middle age if they manage to survive the onslaught of aggression from other men that long.

Similar trends tied to age are observed in contemporary Western societies. One indication of men’s resources over their lifetime in contemporary Western society is actual monetary income. Unfortunately, no worldwide statistics are available on men’s and women’s resources as a function of age. A particular income distribution by age in the United States, however, has been found repeatedly over the years. The distribution of men’s average income in the United States, broken down by age, shows that income tends to be quite low among men in their teens and early twenties. In the decade between the ages of twenty-five and thirty-four, men’s income attains only two-thirds of its eventual peak. Not until the decades from ages thirty-five to fifty-four does men’s income in the United States achieve its peak. From age fifty-five on, men’s income declines, undoubtedly because some men retire, become incapacitated, or lose the ability to command their previous salaries.49 These income averages conceal great variability, because some men’s resources continue to increase throughout their old age, whereas other men remain poor throughout their lives.

Because older men tend to have more status and resources than younger men, men and women of the same age differ on average in their value as mates. In the same decade between the ages of sixteen and twenty-five when women peak in fertility and reproductive value, men’s income and status are typically the lowest that they will be in their adult lives. When most women between the ages of thirty-five and forty-four are rapidly approaching the end of their reproductive years, most men in the same decade are just approaching the peak of their earning capacity. To the extent that the central ingredients of desirability are a woman’s reproductive value and a man’s resource capacity, men and women of comparable age are not typically comparable in desirability.

Greater variability, which is the other critical difference between the value of women and men as mates at different ages, renders age per se a less important factor for men in mating. Men’s occupational status in Western societies ranges from janitor or burger flipper to CEO, college president, or successful entrepreneur. Men at the same age vary in income from the nickels and dimes of a homeless person to the billions of a Bill Gates, Mark Zuckerberg, or Warren Buffett. Between the ages of twenty and forty, men diverge dramatically in their ability to accrue resources.

These trends fail, however, to reveal the tremendous variability in the individual circumstances of women who do the choosing. From a woman’s perspective, her particular circumstances, not the averages, carry the most weight. Some middle-aged women prefer older men not because of their resources but because they believe that older men value them more than do men their own age. Among the Aka of Africa, for example, men who achieve high status and garner many resources during their lives contribute little to the direct care of their children when they marry. In contrast, Aka men who attain only low status and few resources for a wife and children compensate by spending more time directly caring for the children.50 One key indicator of a father’s investment, for example, is how many minutes a day he spends holding an infant, which is an expensive activity in terms of both calories consumed and other activities forgone. Holding protects an infant from environmental dangers, temperature changes, accidents, and aggression from others. Aka men who maintain positions of status in the group hold their infants an average of thirty minutes per day. Men who lack positions of status, in contrast, hold their infants more than seventy minutes per day. Although women typically prefer men with status and resources, a man’s willingness to parent constitutes a valuable resource that can partially compensate for the lack of other qualities.

Some women, because of the tremendous economic resources they command, may not need to select a man based on his external acquisitions. The desirability of men must be evaluated by means of the psychological adaptations of women, and these mechanisms are highly sensitive to circumstances. This is not to deny the importance of average trends; indeed, selection has produced such trends over thousands of generations of human evolutionary history. Our evolved psychological mechanisms include not only those that promote mate choices that are specific and typical of each sex but also adaptations that tailor our choices over our lifetime to the individual circumstances in which we find ourselves.


