Sexual Signaling

Most men want one benefit from casual mating: low-cost sex with attractive women. For women, therefore, explicit overtures that signal sexual availability or receptivity are exceptionally effective tactics. These include talking seductively, making a man think of having sex with her, and simply asking a man if he wants to have sex. These attraction tactics are maximally effective for women in casual mating contexts.

Men in singles bars corroborated these findings. When they evaluated 103 mate-attracting tactics for their effectiveness, they singled out the actions of a woman making direct eye contact, looking at him seductively, brushing up against him, running her hands through his hair, puckering her lips and blowing kisses, sucking on a straw or finger, leaning forward to expose her chest, and bending over to accentuate her curves. In sharp contrast, women judged these same actions when performed by men to be a great turnoff. The more overt the sexual advances by men, the less attractive women find them. On a 7-point scale, men placed a woman’s action of rubbing her chest or pelvis up against a man at 6.07—the second most effective act of all 103 acts, exceeded only by simply agreeing to have sex with the man. Women, however, placed a man’s use of such an action at only 1.82, suggesting that it is highly ineffective. So-called dick-pics, sent by some men in the erroneous belief that they will turn a woman on, in fact repulse most women.

Women also sometimes sexualize their appearance. Men in the single bars studied stated that a woman’s wearing sexy, revealing, tight clothes; wearing a shirt with a low-cut back or a low-cut front; letting the strap or shirt slip off her shoulders; wearing a short skirt; walking with a hip swivel; and dancing provocatively all placed in the top 25 percent of the tactics most likely to attract them. A study by T. Joel Wade and Jennifer Slemp similarly found that the most effective flirtation tactics for women include touching, dressing in revealing clothing, moving closer, kissing on the cheek, and rubbing against the man.37 Effective nonverbal seduction tactics for women in Lisbon, Portugal, included wearing tight skirts, wearing low-neck blouses, and exposing legs through short skirts or wearing attention-getting black or red nylons.38 Women who sexualize their appearance and behavior succeed in evoking approaches from men.

The power for women in sexualizing their appearance is further shown by a study of clothing style and skin exposure. Men and women watched photos of the opposite sex in which models differed in the amount of skin exposed and the tightness of their clothing. After each image, people judged the model’s attractiveness as a dating partner, marital partner, and sex partner. Men found women in tight-fitting and revealing clothing more attractive than fully clothed women as dating partners and sex partners, but not as marriage partners. Women, in contrast, judged men in tight-fitting and revealing clothes to be less attractive than fully clothed men in all conditions, probably because these men were signaling that they were primarily interested in casual sex.39

Women’s sexualization of their appearance becomes quite overt in singles bars. Researchers Natalie Allon and Diane Fishel report that women “often walked around the room, standing tall, protruding their chests, holding in their stomachs, stroking their own arms or hair—they seemed to exhibit themselves on public display.” Sometimes a woman’s sexy looks are so effective that they crowd out all other male thoughts. Allon and Fishel describe one woman who was very thin, attractive, and large-breasted:

She often tended to say things that were scatterbrained and she had a nervous giggle. Her talk and her erratic laughter seemed quite secondary in the singles bar, as most men who talked to her were preoccupied with her chest and the way she displayed her chest by twisting and turning. Some men commented to us that they hardly heard what this woman said—or for that matter, even cared what she said. Such men seemed to prefer to look at this woman’s chest than to listen to her.40

Initiating visual contact also proves to be a highly effective tactic for women who seek to attract a sex partner. Looking intensely into a man’s eyes and allowing him to see her staring are judged to be among the top 15 percent of effective tactics women can use to attract short-term sex partners. In contrast, this tactic proves only moderately effective in attracting committed mates, scoring near the midpoint of the 7-point scale.

A woman who initiates visual contact signals good odds of sexual success. In one study, a man and a woman were videotaped interacting.41 After a brief period of time, the woman looked into the man’s eyes and smiled at him. Men and women witnessed the videotape and then made judgments about the woman’s intentions. Men interpreted eye contact and smiling as signs of sexual interest and seductive intent. Women who observed the same actions by other women interpreted them as signs of friendliness rather than seductiveness. Clearly, eye contact and smiles are often ambiguous—sometimes they signal sexual interest, and sometimes they do not—but men are more likely to err in the direction of inferring sexual interest, exhibiting a male sexual overperception bias. That is, when confronted with ambiguous cues, men over-infer sexual interest when it is often not actually there (see Chapter 7 on error management theory).

While women convey sexual availability as a tactic, they also question the sexual availability of other women as a means of derogating them. When a college woman derogates a rival in a short-term context, she mentions that her rival is merely a tease, indicates that her rival leads men on, and tells the man that her rival is frigid. All of these acts of derogation imply that the other woman will not be sexually available to the man and that he is likely to waste his time and energy if he pursues her as a casual partner.

Women also call their sexual competitors prudish, priggish, or puritanical. Questioning the sexual accessibility of rivals is an effective female strategy, because unavailable women are costly for men who seek casual sex—they risk channeling time and resources toward dubious prospects.

Some ways in which women question a rival’s sexual accessibility, such as calling a competitor a tease and saying that she leads men on, seem extraordinarily clever, because at the same time such remarks do not imply that the woman is loyal, faithful, or a good long-term prospect. Rather, they imply that she uses an exploitative strategy of feigning sexual approachability, perhaps to obtain resources and attention, but then fails to deliver. Furthermore, saying that a rival is frigid or prudish implies that she is a problematic casual sex partner without implying that she is also a desirable long-term mate, because men also dislike sexual coldness in both mating contexts. Tactics that simultaneously derogate a rival’s short-term and long-term value on the mating market are especially effective.

Mae West once commented, “Brains are an asset, if you hide them.” That may indeed be true for casual sex. Women sometimes act submissive, helpless, and less intelligent than they really are to attract short-term mates. Women report pretending to be helpless, letting the man control the conversation, acting dumb, acting “ditzy,” and pretending to be meek and submissive. A woman’s submissiveness conveys to a man that he need not expect hostile reactions to his advances.42 Subservient signals implicitly give men permission to approach. Since men are more likely to initiate approaches, signs of submissiveness and helplessness lower barriers to approach. Acting submissive elicits approaches from a larger number of men, expands the pool of potential mates, creates greater opportunities for choice, and ultimately increases the quality of the mate obtained.

Acting submissive, helpless, or dumb may also signal that the man will be able to control or manipulate the woman easily for his own ends. A woman’s apparent helplessness may signal ease of sexual exploitation—sex without the cost of commitment.43 The stereotype of the “bubble-headed blonde” may be misleading; this public presentation is intended as a strategic signal of approachability or even sexual accessibility rather than of actual intellectual ineptness. Women sometimes present the allure of vulnerability for their own strategic purposes.44

Signals of sexual accessibility are sometimes part of a larger strategy to lure a man into a long-term relationship. Sometimes the only way a woman can gain the attention and interest of a man is by offering herself as sexually available with no apparent strings attached. If the costs in resources and commitment are made low enough, many men succumb to sexual opportunity. Once a woman gains sexual access to a man of her choice, her proximity offers opportunities for insinuating herself, for making the man depend on her for various functions, and for gradually escalating both the benefits he will receive by staying in the relationship and the costs he will incur if he leaves her. What seems initially like costless sex without strings attached ends up being transformed into commitment.

Women sometimes bait men with sex. Because men’s psychological adaptations orient them so vigilantly to short-term sexual opportunities, women can exploit them as a first step toward luring them into a committed relationship.


