The Menace of Mate Poachers

One reason mate-keeping tactics are crucial is because mate poaching is an ever-present threat. Desirable mates are always in short supply. Glamorous, interesting, attractive, socially skilled people are heavily courted and rapidly removed from the mating pool. Those who succeed in attracting the 9’s and 10’s tend to hold on to them, escalating the effort they allocate to mate guarding.7 Transitions between relationships are brief for the beautiful. In modern monogamous societies, for those left on the sidelines of the mating dance, mate shortages get more severe with each passing year. In traditional polygynous societies, where most desirable women marry shortly after puberty, single men suffer the most. How can a person find a desirable mate when all these factors conspire to take attractive mates out of the mating market?

One unpretty solution to this recurrent quandary is mate poaching. Although many regard efforts to lure someone out of an existing mateship as morally reprehensible, it has a long recorded history.8 One of the earliest written records of mate poaching is the biblical account of King David and Bathsheba. One day King David happened to spy the beautiful Bathsheba, wife of Uriah, bathing on the roof of a neighboring house. David’s passion for her consumed him. He succeeded in seducing her, and consequently Bathsheba became pregnant. King David set out to destroy Uriah by sending him to the battle front and commanding his troops to retreat, exposing him to mortal danger. After Uriah was killed, King David married Bathsheba. Although their first child died, their union proved fruitful, and they went on to produce four children.

Mate poaching is a common mating strategy. David Schmitt and I discovered that 60 percent of men and 53 percent of women admitted to having attempted to lure someone else’s mate into a committed relationship. Although more than half of these attempts failed, nearly half succeeded. This similarity between the genders in long-term poaching attempts contrasted with poaching efforts targeting brief sexual encounters—60 percent of the men but only 38 percent of the women reported attempting to lure someone else’s mate into a casual sexual encounter. Far higher percentages of both genders said that others had attempted to entice them to leave their own existing relationship—93 percent of the men and 82 percent of the women for long-term love, and 87 percent of the men and 94 percent of the women for a brief sexual encounter.

Somewhat smaller percentages reported that someone had attempted to poach their own mate, suggesting that poaching ploys are often initiated away from the prying eyes of the unsuspecting “victim.” Roughly one-third of our sample—35 percent of the men and 30 percent of the women—reported that a partner had been successfully taken away from them by a mate poacher. Although many attempts at mate poaching fail, nearly one-third appear to succeed. Schmitt has replicated these basic findings in a massive cross-cultural study involving more than thirty nations.9 Mate poaching has probably been successful often enough to have evolved as a distinct sexual strategy.

People poach for many of the same reasons they mate to begin with—to find emotional intimacy, experience passionate sex, secure protection, gain resources, enhance social status, fall in love, or have children. But mate poachers perceive additional benefits unique to the context of mate poaching. One is gaining revenge against a rival by stealing the rival’s mate. Vengeance could only have evolved as a motive, of course, if it served an adaptive function, such as inflicting a cost on a rival that lowered the rival’s relative reproductive success or deterring other potential rivals from inflicting costs. Another benefit is securing access to a pre-approved mate, one who has already established credibility by passing another’s screening criteria. Although enticing a mate who is already “taken” can provide these benefits, it sometimes comes at a price. Mate poachers risk violence—injury or even death—at the hands of the jealous partner. A poacher also incurs damage to his or her social reputation if branded as a deceiver. Poachers may be shunned when word of their deceit gets around, impairing their ability to attract other potential mates. Furthermore, if the mate poacher is successful, it might be costly to have a mate who is revealed to be potentially poachable and thus requires more expensive mate guarding.

Schmitt and I found that many of the tactics used to attract mates in other contexts—enhancing appearance, displaying resources, showing kindness, presenting a sense of humor, revealing empathy, and so on—are also effective for the purpose of poaching. Two tactics, however, are specially tailored to enticing mates away from others. The first is temporal invasion, which includes acts such as changing one’s schedule in order to be around the target more often than the target’s current partner, or dropping by when the current partner is off at work or out of town. The second is driving a wedge—infiltrating the existing mateship and actively promoting a breakup. One way to drive a wedge is to boost the target’s self-esteem, conveying messages that enhance their self-perceptions of their own desirability. At the same time, the poacher might communicate that the target is not appreciated by the regular partner: “He doesn’t treat you well,” or “You deserve better,” or “You’re too good for him.” The boost in self-esteem combined with the feeling of being underappreciated is sometimes enough to widen a small crack in a relationship. Through this double-pronged strategy, the mate poacher frees up an already taken mate and sits waiting in the wings when it happens.

Although not terribly admirable, there is good evidence that mate poaching can be an effective mating strategy. Indeed, those who pursue a mate poaching strategy have a larger number of lifetime sex partners and dating partners.10

Humans have evolved their own special strategies for defending against mate poachers and retaining a mate. Women in relationships are especially vigilant about rival women, whereas men tend to be more vigilant about monitoring their own partner.11 One of the most important mate retention strategies involves continuing to fulfill the desires of one’s mate—the desires that led to the mate selection to begin with. But merely fulfilling these desires may not be enough if rivals are attempting the same thing. Ancestral humans needed a psychological mechanism specifically designed to alert them to potential threats from the outside, an adaptation that would regulate when to deploy mate-guarding strategies. That mechanism was sexual jealousy.


