Compatibility

Successful long-term mating requires a sustained cooperative alliance with another person for mutually beneficial goals. Relationships riddled with conflict impede the attainment of these goals. Compatibility between mates entails a complex mesh between two different kinds of characteristics. One kind involves complementary traits, or a mate’s possession of resources and skills that differ from one’s own, in a kind of division of labor between the sexes. Both partners can benefit from specialization and division.

The other kinds of traits crucial to compatibility with a mate, however, are those that are most likely to mesh cooperatively with one’s own particular personal characteristics and thus are most similar to one’s own. Discrepancies between partners in their political orientations, religious views, moral values, hobbies and interests, and even personalities can produce strife and conflict. The psychologist Zick Rubin and his colleagues studied 202 dating couples over several years to see which ones stayed together and which broke up.39 They found that mismatched couples tended to break up more readily than their matched counterparts. The 103 couples who broke up had more dissimilar values on sex roles, sexual attitudes, romanticism, and religious beliefs than did the 99 couples who stayed together.

One solution to the problem of compatibility is to search for similarity in a mate. Both in the United States and worldwide, men and women who are similar to each other on a wide variety of characteristics tend to get married. The tendency for like people to mate shows up most obviously in the areas of values, intelligence, and group membership.40 People seek mates with similar political and social values, such as their views on abortion and capital punishment. People also desire mates who are similar in race, ethnicity, and religion. Couples desire and marry mates of similar intelligence. In addition, similarity matters in personality characteristics such as extraversion, agreeableness, and conscientiousness. People like mates who share their inclination toward parties if they are extraverted and toward quiet evenings at home if they are introverted. People who are characteristically open to experience prefer mates who share their interest in wines, art, literature, and the culinary delights of fine foods. Conscientious people prefer mates who share their interest in paying bills on time and saving for the future. Less conscientious people prefer mates who share their interest in living for the moment.

The similarity within compatible couples is in part a by-product of the fact that people tend to marry others who are in close proximity, and those who are nearby tend to be similar to oneself. Similarity of intelligence in modern marriages, for example, may be an incidental outcome of the fact that people of similar intelligence tend to go to the same educational institutions. The incidental outcome explanation, however, cannot account for the widespread preference that people express for mates who are similar.41 In a study conducted on dating couples in Cambridge, Massachusetts, my lab measured the personalities and intelligence levels of 108 individuals who were involved in a dating relationship. Separately, the couples completed a questionnaire that asked for their preferences in an ideal mate on the same qualities. The study found that women preferred mates who were similar to themselves in many respects, including boldness, dominance, and activeness; warmth, agreeableness, and kindness; responsibility, conscientiousness, and industriousness; and especially intelligence, perceptiveness, and creativity.

The search for a similar mate provides an elegant solution to the adaptive problem of creating compatibility within the couple so that their interests are maximally aligned in the pursuit of mutual goals. Consider a woman who is an extravert and loves wild parties and who is married to an introvert who prefers quiet evenings at home. Although they may decide to go their separate ways evening after evening, the mismatch causes strife. Couples in which both members are introverted or both are extraverts do not butt heads about mutually pursued activities. The marriage of a Democrat and a Republican or a gun control advocate and a gun rights proponent can make for interesting discussions, but the ensuing conflict wastes valuable energy.

Perhaps more important, matched couples maximize the smooth coordination of their efforts when pursuing mutual goals such as child rearing, maintaining kin alliances, and social networking. A couple at odds over how to rear their child waste valuable energy and also confuse the child, who receives contradictory messages. The search for similarity prevents couples from incurring these costs.

People also seek similarity in overall mate value. Because personality characteristics such as agreeableness, conscientiousness, and intelligence are all highly desirable on the mating market, those who possess more of them can command more of them in a mate.42 Those who lack these valuable personal assets can command less and so often limit their search to those with assets that are similar to their own. By seeking similarity, individuals avoid wasting time and energy trying to attract people who are out of their reach. Consider this example. A female colleague complained that all the men she was attracted to were not interested in her, yet she was being pursued constantly by men she was not really interested in. Her friend told her: “You are an 8, going after 10s, but being sought by 6s.”43 This single observation proved more valuable to her on the mating market than three years of therapy. She adjusted her mating strategy accordingly.

Those who compete for a mate who exceeds their own mate value risk abandonment by the partner whose mating options are more expansive. Partners discrepant in mate value tend to break up because the more desirable partner can strike a better bargain elsewhere.44

The search for similarity thus solves several adaptive problems simultaneously: it maximizes the value one can command on the mating market; leads to the coordination of efforts; reduces conflict within the couple; avoids the costs of mutually incompatible goals; and reduces the risk of later abandonment or breakup.


