Youth

It is a fact of fertility that women’s reproductive capacity declines steadily with increasing age after the midtwenties. By the age of forty, a woman’s reproductive capacity is low. By fifty, it is close to zero. Women’s capacity for reproduction is compressed into a fraction of their lives.

Men’s preferences capitalize on this critical cue. In the United States, men uniformly express a desire for mates who are younger than they are. Among college students surveyed from 1939 through 2005 on campuses coast to coast, the preferred age difference hovered around two and a half years.5 Twenty-one-year-old men preferred, on average, women who were eighteen and a half.

Men’s preoccupation with a woman’s youth is not limited to Western cultures. When the anthropologist Napoleon Chagnon was asked which females are most sexually attractive to Yanomamö men of the Amazon, he replied without hesitation, “Females who are moko dude.”6 The word moko, when used with respect to fruit, means that the fruit is harvestable, and when used with respect to a woman, it means that the woman is fertile. Thus, fruit that is moko dude is perfectly ripe, and a woman who is moko dude is postpubescent but has not yet borne her first child, or about fifteen to eighteen years of age. Comparative information on other tribal and traditional peoples suggests that the Yanomamö men are typical in their preference.

Nigerian, Indonesian, Iranian, and Indian men are similarly inclined. Without exception, in every one of the thirty-seven societies examined in the international study, men preferred wives who were younger than themselves. Nigerian men who were twenty-three and a half years old, for example, preferred wives who were six and a half years younger, or just over seventeen years old. Croatian men who were twenty-one and a half years old expressed a desire for wives who were approximately nineteen. Chinese, Canadian, and Colombian men shared with their Nigerian and Croatian brethren a powerful desire for younger women. On average, men from the thirty-seven cultures expressed a desire for wives approximately two and a half years younger than themselves.

Although men universally preferred younger women as wives, the strength of this preference varied somewhat from culture to culture. Scandinavian men in Finland, Sweden, and Norway preferred their brides to be only one or two years younger. Men in Nigeria and Zambia preferred their brides to be six and a half and seven and a half years younger, respectively. In Nigeria and Zambia, which practice polygyny, like many cultures worldwide, men who can afford it are legally permitted to marry more than one woman. Men in polygynous mating systems are typically older than men in monogamous systems by the time they have acquired sufficient resources to attract wives. The larger age difference preferred by Nigerian and Zambian men probably reflects their greater age when they acquire wives.7

This interpretation is supported by a raft of scientific studies showing that, as men get older, they prefer as mates women who are increasingly younger than they are. Consider the statistics derived from online personal advertisements.8 A man’s age has a strong effect on his preferences: men in their thirties prefer women who are roughly five years younger, whereas men in their fifties prefer women ten to twenty years younger.9

Although these findings support the evolutionary hypothesis that men prefer younger, and hence more fertile, women, this perspective actually leads to a very counterintuitive prediction—namely, that young adolescent males should prefer women who are slightly older than they are. Scientific studies bear this prediction out. Adolescent males age fifteen, for example, express a desire for females who are seventeen or eighteen.10 What is fascinating is that this attraction is almost entirely unreciprocated. Women in their late teens do not even notice these young adolescent males, much less find themselves attracted to them. They prefer men a few years older, not a few years younger.

These findings regarding adolescent males contradict two potential alternative explanations for why older men are attracted to younger women. One—an old standby in psychology—is reinforcement theory: that people repeat behaviors for which they are rewarded. Adolescent males are hardly reinforced or rewarded by the women they are most attracted to; indeed, they are ignored or actively shunned by these women. A second explanation is that men are attracted to younger women as a means of exercising power and control. But the mid-adolescent males have no power or control at all over the late-adolescent women they find so beautiful. The fertility explanation, in short, provides the most compelling explanation for the entire pattern of findings, from the attractions of adolescent males to men’s attractions toward women who are increasingly younger relative to their own age as the men get increasingly older.

Actual marriage decisions confirm the preference of men for women who are increasingly younger than they are as they age. American grooms exceed their brides in age by roughly three years at first marriage, five years at second marriage, and eight years at third marriage.11 Men’s preference for younger women also translates into actual marriage decisions worldwide. In Sweden during the 1800s, for example, church documents reveal that men who remarried following a divorce selected new brides 10.6 years younger on average. In all countries around the world where information is available on the ages of brides and grooms, men on average exceed their brides in age.12 Among European countries, the age difference ranges from about two years in Poland to roughly five years in Greece. Averaged across all countries, grooms are three years older than their brides, or roughly the difference expressly desired by men worldwide. In polygynous cultures, the age difference runs even larger. Among the Tiwi of northern Australia, for example, high-status older men often have wives who are two and three decades younger than they are.13 In summary, contemporary men prefer young women because they have inherited from their male ancestors an evolved preference that focused intensely on this cue to a woman’s reproductive value. This psychological preference translates into actual mating decisions much of the time—although as we will see later, people can’t always get what they want.


