Sexual Orientation and Casual Sex

A further clue to the significant role of casual mating in men’s sexual repertoire comes from examining the sexual behavior of homosexual men and women. Donald Symons notes that male homosexual sexuality is unconstrained by women’s dictates of romance, involvement, and commitment. Similarly, lesbian sexuality is unconstrained by men’s dictates and demands. The actual behavior of those with a same-sex sexual orientation therefore provides a window for viewing the nature of all men’s and women’s sexual desires, unclouded by the compromises imposed by the sexual strategies of the other sex.

Gay men are much more interested in casual sex with strangers than are lesbian women.45 Whereas male homosexuals often pursue brief encounters, lesbians rarely do. Whereas male homosexuals frequently search for new and varied sex partners, lesbians are more likely to settle into intimate, lasting, committed relationships. One study found that 94 percent of male homosexuals had more than fifteen sex partners, whereas only 15 percent of lesbians had that many.46 The more extensive Kinsey study conducted in San Francisco in the 1980s found that almost one-half of the male homosexuals who participated had over 500 different sex partners, mostly strangers met in baths or bars.47 Some modern dating apps such as Grindr are specifically designed to facilitate these sexual opportunities. When men are unconstrained by the courtship and commitment requirements women often want, they freely satisfy their desires for casual sex with a variety of partners.

In their proclivities for casual sex, as in their long-term mate preferences, homosexual males are similar to heterosexual males and lesbian women are similar to heterosexual women. Homosexual proclivities reveal fundamental differences between men and women in the centrality of casual sex. Symons notes that “heterosexual men would be as likely as homosexual men to have sex most often with strangers, to participate in anonymous orgies in public baths, and to stop off in public rest rooms for five minutes of fellatio on the way home from work if women were interested in these activities. But women are not interested.”48


