Gender-Linked Adaptive Functions of Sexual Jealousy

Whenever males contribute to their offspring, they confront the problem of uncertain paternity. This problem occurs whenever fertilization and gestation occur inside the female’s body. It intensifies whenever males invest in offspring after they are born. Compared with many other male mammals, men invest tremendously in their offspring. Cuckoldry is therefore a serious adaptive problem that men have had to solve throughout human evolutionary history. The prevalence of the problem in the animal kingdom is reflected in the fact that so few mammalian males invest at all in their young.12 Among chimpanzees, our closest primate relatives, males defend their troop against chimp aggressors, but they invest little or nothing in their own offspring. Males would incur a double penalty if they invested in their children without some certainty of paternity: their parental effort would not only be wasted but might also get channeled to a rival’s offspring. The general failure of male mammals to invest in their young is telling—most have not solved the problem of ensuring paternity. The fact that men do invest heavily in their young provides powerful evidence that our ancestors evolved effective paternity assurance adaptations. Studies of sexual jealousy, in all its diverse manifestations, provide direct evidence that jealousy is one of the primary adaptations.

Imagine getting off work early and returning home. As you enter the house you hear sounds coming from the back room. You call your partner’s name, but no one answers. As you approach the back room, sounds of heavy breathing and moaning become louder. You open the bedroom door. On the bed is a stranger, naked and having passionate sexual intercourse with your partner. What emotions would you experience? If you are human, you would most likely experience some combination of humiliation, rage, betrayal, despondency, and grief.13

Sexual jealousy consists of emotions that are evoked by a perceived threat to a sexual relationship. The perception of a threat leads to actions designed to reduce or eliminate that threat.14 These can range from vigilance, which functions to monitor the mate for signs of extra-pair involvement, to violence, which inflicts a heavy cost on the mate or rival. Sexual jealousy is activated by cues that someone else has an interest in one’s mate or by indications of a mate’s defection, such as flirting with someone else. The rage, sadness, and humiliation following these cues motivate action intended either to cut off a rival, prevent the mate’s defection, or, sometimes, cut one’s losses.

Men who fail to solve this adaptive problem risk not only suffering direct reproductive costs but also losing status and reputation, which can seriously impair their ability to attract other mates. Consider the reaction in Greek culture to cuckoldry: “The wife’s infidelity . . . brings disgrace to the husband who is then a Keratas—the worst insult for a Greek man—a shameful epithet with connotations of weakness and inadequacy. . . . While for the wife it is socially acceptable to tolerate her unfaithful husband, it is not socially acceptable for a man to tolerate his unfaithful wife and if he does so, he is ridiculed as behaving in an unmanly manner.”15 Cuckolded men are universal objects of derision. The penalties for failure to keep a mate, including the loss of social status, are compounded by diminished future success in the game of mating.

Most research on jealousy has focused on male sexual jealousy, probably because of the asymmetry between men’s and women’s confidence about their parenthood. Nonetheless, women experience jealousy just as intensely; a mate’s contact with other women can lead him to redirect his resources and commitment away from her and her children and toward another woman and her children. Men and women do not differ in either the frequency or the magnitude of their jealousy experience. In one study, 300 individuals who were partners in 150 romantic relationships were asked to rate how jealous they were in general, how jealous they were of their partner’s relationships with members of the other sex, and the degree to which jealousy was a problem in their relationship. Men and women admitted to equal amounts of jealousy, confirming that both experience jealousy and overall do not differ in the intensity of their jealous feelings.16

These reactions are not limited to the United States. Over 2,000 individuals from Hungary, Ireland, Mexico, the Netherlands, the United States, and the former Soviet Union and Yugoslavia were asked their reactions to a variety of different sexual scenarios. Men and women in all of these places expressed identically negative emotional reactions to thoughts of their partner’s flirting with someone else or having sexual relations with someone else. The genders are also the same in their jealous reactions to a sexual partner’s hugging someone else or dancing with someone else, although their responses to these events are less negative than to flirting and sexual relations. For both men and women worldwide, as in the United States, jealousy is an adaptation that becomes activated in response to a threat to a valued relationship.17

Despite these similarities, there are intriguing gender differences in the content and focus of jealousy and in the specific events that trigger jealousy. In one study, twenty men and twenty women were asked to play a role in a scenario in which they became jealous.18 But first the participants had to choose their scenario from among a group of possible scenarios, which typically involved either jealousy over a partner’s sexual involvement with someone else or jealousy over a partner’s devotion of time and resources to someone else. Seventeen women chose infidelity in the allocation of either resources or time as the jealousy-inducing event, and only three women chose sexual infidelity. In marked contrast, sixteen of the twenty men chose sexual infidelity as the jealousy-inducing event, and only four men chose the diversion of time or resources. This study provides the first clue that, although both men and women have the jealousy adaptation, it is triggered by different events, and that those events correspond to the adaptive problems of ensuring paternity for men and ensuring resources and commitment for women.

In another study, fifteen couples listed situations that would make them jealous. Men identified sexual involvement between their partner and another man as the primary cause of jealousy, and secondarily comparison between themselves and a rival. Women, in contrast, indicated that they would become jealous primarily in response to their partner’s spending time with other women, talking with a rival, and kissing a female rival.19 Women’s jealousy, in short, is triggered by cues to the possible diversion of their mate’s investment to another woman, whereas men’s jealousy is triggered primarily by cues to their mate’s having sex with another man.

These gender differences reveal themselves both psychologically and physiologically. In a study of sex differences in jealousy, my colleagues and I asked 511 college men and women to compare two distressing events—if their partner had sexual intercourse with someone else and if their partner formed a deep emotional attachment to someone else.20 Fully 83 percent of the women found their partner’s emotional infidelity more upsetting, whereas only 40 percent of the men did. In contrast, 60 percent of the men experienced their partner’s sexual infidelity as more upsetting, whereas only 17 percent of the women did.

To evaluate a different group—this one comprising sixty men and women—on their physiological distress in response to sexual and emotional infidelity, we placed electrodes on the corrugator muscle in the brow, which contracts when people frown; on the first and third fingers of the right hand to measure skin conductance, or sweating; and on the thumb to measure heart rate. Then we asked people to imagine two types of infidelity, sexual and emotional. Men became more physiologically distressed by the sexual infidelity. Their heart rates accelerated by nearly five beats per minute, equivalent to drinking three cups of coffee in one sitting. Their skin conductance increased 1.5 micro-siemens with the thought of sexual infidelity, but showed little change from baseline in response to the thought of emotional infidelity. And their frowning increased, showing 7.75 microvolt units of contraction in response to sexual infidelity, as compared with only 1.16 units in response to emotional infidelity. Women tended to show the opposite pattern, exhibiting greater physiological distress at the thought of emotional infidelity. Women’s frowning, for example, increased to 8.12 microvolt units of contraction in response to emotional infidelity, from only 3.03 units of contraction in response to sexual infidelity. Other researchers have replicated the physiological gender differences using multiple measures.21 The coordination of psychological distress with physiological distress illustrates the precision with which humans have adapted over time to the specific threats they have faced to keeping a mate.

Sex differences in the causes of jealousy are not limited to Americans. In one study of jealous men and women in central Europe, 80 percent of the men expressed fears of a sexual nature, such as worrying about their mate’s having intercourse with another man or worrying about their own sexual adequacy.22 Only 22 percent of the jealous women expressed sexual concerns, the majority focusing instead on the emotional relationship, such as the degree of closeness between their mate and another woman. Men in Hungary, Ireland, Mexico, the Netherlands, the Soviet Union, the United States, and Croatia all showed more intense jealousy than women in response to their partner’s having sexual fantasies about another person.23 These gender differences in the triggers of jealousy appear to characterize the entire human species.


