Lack of Economic Support

A man’s ability and willingness to provide a woman with resources are central to his mate value, central to her selection of him as a partner, central to the tactics that men use to attract mates, and central to the tactics that men use to retain mates. In evolutionary terms, a man’s failure to provide resources to his wife and her children should therefore have been a major gender-linked cause of breakups. Men who are unable or unwilling to supply these resources fail to fulfill a key criterion on which women initially select them.

Provisioning failure by men is a cause of divorce worldwide. In the cross-cultural study on conjugal dissolution, twenty societies cited inadequate economic support as a cause of divorce, four cited inadequate housing, three cited inadequate food, and four cited inadequate clothing. All these causes were ascribed solely and exclusively to men. In no society did a woman’s failure to provide resources constitute grounds for divorce.24

The seriousness of a man’s lack of economic provision is illustrated by the report of a woman in her late twenties who participated in a study of marital separation:

My husband lost a series of jobs and was very depressed. He just couldn’t keep a job. He had a job for a couple of years, and that ended, and then he had another for a year, and that ended, and then he had another. And then he was really depressed, and he saw a social worker, but it didn’t seem to be helping. And he was sleeping a lot. And I think one day I just came to the end of the line with his sleeping. I think I went out one night and came back and he hadn’t even been able to get out of bed to put the children to bed. I left them watching television and there they were when I came back. The next day I asked him to leave. Very forcefully.25

In contemporary America, women who make more money than their husbands tend to leave them. One study found that the divorce rate among American couples in which the woman earns more than her husband is 50 percent higher than among couples in which the husband earns more than his wife.26 Men whose wives’ careers blossom sometimes express resentment. In a study on the causes of divorce among women, one woman noted that her husband “hated that I earned more than he did; it made him feel less than a man.” Women also resent husbands who lack ambition. Another woman noted: “I worked full-time, while he worked part-time and drank full-time; eventually, I realized I wanted more help getting where I’m going.”27 Women eject men who do not fulfill their preference for a mate who provides resources, especially when they can earn more.


