Sexual Harassment

Although abuse and other forms of conflict are common within couples, sexual conflict is also common outside of mating relationships. For instance, disagreements over sexual access sometimes occur in the workplace, where people often seek casual and romantic mates. The search may cross a line and become sexual harassment, which can be defined as “unwanted and unsolicited sexual attention from other individuals in the workplace.”40 It includes mild forms such as unwanted staring at a woman’s breasts and body, what one woman described as the “up-down” as a man scans her physique from head to toe. It includes sexual comments, such as “nice ass” or “beautiful body.” And it includes physical violations, such as the touching of breasts, buttocks, or thighs. Sexual harassment clearly produces conflict between the sexes.

Evolutionary psychology offers insight into the psychology that motivates sexual harassment and the circumstances that trigger it. Sexual harassment is typically motivated by the desire for short-term sexual access, although it is sometimes motivated by power or by a search for a lasting romantic relationship. Evolved sexual strategies shed light on sexual harassment through the profiles of typical victims, including such features as their age, marital status, and physical attractiveness; their reactions to unwanted sexual advances; and the conditions under which they were harassed.

Victims of sexual harassment are not random. In one study of complaints filed with the Illinois Department of Human Rights over a two-year period, seventy-six complaints were filed by women and only five by men.41 Another study of 10,644 federal government employees found that 42 percent of the women, but only 15 percent of the men, had experienced sexual harassment at some point in their career.42 Among complaints filed in Canada under human rights legislation, ninety-three cases were filed by women and only two by men. In both cases filed by men, the harassers were men rather than women.43 Women are generally the victims and men the perpetrators. Nonetheless, because women experience greater distress than do men in response to acts of sexual aggressiveness, women might be more likely to file official complaints than men when harassed.

The victims of sexual harassment are disproportionately young, physically attractive, single women. Women over forty-five are less likely to be victims.44 One study found that women between the ages of twenty and thirty-five filed 72 percent of the complaints of harassment, whereas they represented only 43 percent of the workforce at the time. Women over forty-five, who represented 28 percent of the workforce, filed only 5 percent of the complaints.45 The victims of sexual harassment are women whose relative youth evokes male sexual interest in general.

Single and divorced women are subjected to more sexual harassment than married women. In one study, single women represented only 25 percent of the workforce but filed 43 percent of complaints; married women, comprising 55 percent of the workforce, filed only 31 percent of the complaints.46 There may be several reasons for these differences. Husbands sometimes function as “bodyguards,” deterring would-be harassers. Moreover, men perceive single women to be more receptive to sexual advances or more easily sexually exploitable.

Reactions to sexual harassment also follow evolutionary psychological logic. When men and women were asked how they would feel if a coworker of the opposite sex asked them to have sex, 63 percent of the women said that they would be insulted, while only 17 percent said that they would feel flattered.47 Men’s reactions were just the opposite—only 15 percent would be insulted, and 67 percent would feel flattered. These reactions fit with the evolutionary psychology of human mating—men generally have more positive emotional reactions to the prospect of casual sex. Women react more negatively to being treated as mere sex objects.

The degree of anguish women experience from unwanted sexual advances, however, depends in part on the status of the harasser. My lab asked 109 college women how upset they would feel if a man they did not know, whose occupational status varied from low to high, persisted in asking them out on a date despite repeated refusals, a relatively modest form of harassment. On a 7-point scale, women said that they would be most upset by advances from construction workers (4.04), garbage collectors (4.32), cleaning men (4.19), and gas station attendants (4.13), and least upset by persistent advances from premedical students (2.65), graduate students (2.80), and successful rock stars (2.71).48 Women’s distress in response to the same acts of harassment varies depending on men’s status.

Women’s reactions to sexual harassment also depend heavily on whether the motivation of the harasser is perceived to be sexual or romantic. Sexual bribery, attaching job promotions to sex, and other cues that the person is interested only in casual sex are more likely to be labeled as harassment than are signals of potential interest that may transcend the purely sexual, such as nonsexual touching, complimentary looks, or flirting.49 When 110 college women used a 7-point scale to rate how sexually harassing a series of acts by their coworkers would be, acts such as putting his hand on a woman’s genital area (6.81) or trying to corner a woman when no one else was around (6.03) were seen as extremely harassing. In contrast, acts such as telling a woman that he sincerely liked her and would like to have coffee with her after work was judged to be only 1.50 (1.00 signifying no harassment at all).50 Clearly, short-term sexual and coercive intentions are more harassing than sincere romantic intentions.

These findings about the profiles of sexual harassment victims, the sex differences in emotional reactions, and the importance of the status of the harasser all follow from the evolutionary psychology of human mating strategies. Men have evolved lower thresholds for seeking casual sex, and their sexual overperception bias leads them to infer sexual interest where none exists. These sexual adaptations become activated in the workplace perhaps no less than in any other social context.


