Showing Bravado and Self-Confidence

Displays of masculine self-confidence prove effective for men seeking to attract mates but are significantly more effective in attracting casual than committed mates. Acting conceited or macho, bragging about one’s accomplishments, and showing off are all judged by college students to be more effective for men in attracting sex partners than wives. The effectiveness of bravado and confidence is reflected in a story told by a woman in a singles bar:

I was sitting at a corner table talking to my girlfriend and sipping on a gin and tonic. Then Bob walked in. He acted like he owned the place, smiling broadly and very confident. He caught my eye, and I smiled. He sat down and started talking about how horses were his hobby. He casually mentioned that he owned a horse farm. When the last call for alcohol came, he was still talking about how expensive his horses were, and said that we should go riding together. He said, “In fact, we could go riding right now.” It was 2:00 a.m., and I left the bar and had sex with him. I never did find out whether he owned horses.

Self-confidence signals status and resources.19 Among newlyweds, for example, men scoring high on self-confidence earn significantly more money than men with lower self-confidence. Self-confidence translates into success in finding sex partners. A woman at a singles bar put it this way: “Some guys just seem to know what they are doing. They know how to approach you and just make you feel good. Then you get those nerds . . . who can’t get anything right. They come on strong at first, but can’t keep it together. . . . They just hang around until you dump them by going to the rest room or over to a friend to talk.”20 Women distinguish false bravado from real self-confidence, and they find the genuine article more attractive. Men high in self-esteem tend to approach physically attractive women and ask them for dates, regardless of their own physical attractiveness. Men low in self-esteem, in contrast, avoid approaching attractive women, believing that their chances are too slim.21

Self-confidence is responsive to feedback. In singles bars, men rebuffed by women in their first few attempts produce successively less confident approaches. Rejection produces a downward cycle of resentment, hostility, and sometimes a cessation of all tactics. One man in a singles bar commented after a third woman had rebuffed him, “You need steel balls to make it in this place.” Apparently the psychological pain and lowered confidence experienced by rejected men cause them to reevaluate their sexual techniques, lower their sights to women who have lower appeal, and wait until circumstances are more favorable for further attempts.22

Another tactic is to feign confidence. According to the deception study, men boast and brag to make themselves appear better, act more masculine than they really feel, and behave more assertively around women than they really are. Men strut for a reason—to increase their odds of succeeding in sex.

Not all displays of bravado and confidence are directed toward attracting the opposite sex. They are also directed toward other men in an attempt to elevate status and prestige within the group. College men exaggerate the number of their sex partners, mislead others about how many women express a desire for them, exaggerate their own sexual skills, and act braver than they really feel. These are tactics of status competition. Men compete for position, resources, and signs of elevated prestige. If a man can obtain the deference of other men by elevating his position in the sexual domain, his status typically translates into greater access to desirable women.

The fact that men select this tactic primarily in casual mating contexts provides circumstantial support for the sexy son hypothesis. Men who display their bravado and sexual conquests signal to women that they are sexually attractive to women in general. Like the peacock displaying his plumage, these strutting men may be more likely to have sons who are attractive to women in the next generation, assuming some heritability to these proclivities.

This display of bravado is sometimes exploited by other males. To attract females, for example, male bullfrogs sit at the edge of a pond and emit loud, resonant croaks. Females listen carefully to the chorus of male sounds and select one to move toward. The louder and more resonant the croak, the more attractive it is to females. The larger, healthier, and more dominant the male, the more resonant his croaks. The dominant male strategy, therefore, is to emit the loudest and most resonant croaks possible. Sitting silently near a dominant male is a smaller, weaker male. He emits no croaks and attracts no attention. But as a female approaches the dominant sounds, the silent male darts from his hiding place, intercepts her, and quickly copulates. This strategy, called a satellite or sneak strategy, illustrates the exploitation of dominant males by less dominant males who cannot compete directly.23

Humans also use this strategy, which is humorously depicted in the Woody Allen film Everything You Always Wanted to Know About Sex* (*But Were Afraid to Ask). The scene opens with men dressed up as sperm who are fighting with each other over access to an egg. The macho male sperm battle furiously. When they have defeated each other and all lie down exhausted, a small sperm played by Woody Allen steps out cautiously from behind a curtain where he has been cowering and proceeds to hop onto the egg.

Men also sometimes use this sneak strategy, as we found in studies of mate poaching. We asked fifty men and fifty women which strategies they would use to attract someone who was already mated with someone else.24 One of the most frequently used tactics is pretending to be friends with the couple and then switching into mating mode when the opportunity arises. Once in close proximity, mate poachers encourage rifts in the couple’s relationship: “I don’t think your partner appreciates you”; “You are too good for him”; “I think you deserve someone better, someone who treats you like the princess you are . . . someone like me!”

A less common male poaching tactic is to feign femaleness. Among the sunfish in the lakes of Ontario, for example, a small male mimics a female and enters the nesting site of the dominant male. This mimicry reduces the odds of being attacked. Once inside the territory, however, the small male quickly fertilizes the eggs that have already been deposited by the females, cuckolding the dominant, territory-holding male. A rare tactic among humans is to feign homosexuality so as not to incur the suspicion of the dominant man and then attempt to have sex with the woman when he is not around. Nonetheless, it is interesting that a few college men report having observed it. In general, pretending to be nonthreatening as a potential mate poacher—for instance, by pretending to be a friend of the man or pretending to be already committed to another woman—is more common. Like bullfrogs and sunfish, humans occasionally use sneaky strategies.


