—MARJORIE SHOSTAK, Nisa: The Life and Words of a !Kung Woman

TREMENDOUS BENEFITS FLOW to couples who remain committed. From this unique alliance come efficiencies that include complementary skills, a division of labor, and a sharing of resources, as well as mutual benefits such as a unified front against mutual enemies, a stable home environment for rearing children, and a more extended kin network. To reap these benefits, people must be able to retain the mates they have succeeded in attracting.

People who fail to stay together incur severe costs. Bonds between extended kin are ripped apart. Essential resources are lost. Children may be exposed to potentially dangerous stepparents. Failure to keep a committed mate can mean wasting all the effort expended in the selection, attraction, courting, and commitment process. Men who fail to prevent the defection of their mate risk losing access to valuable childbearing capabilities and maternal investment. Women who fail to retain their mate risk losing the mate’s resources, protection, and paternal investment. Both sexes incur opportunity costs, the lost opportunities for exploring other mating prospects.

Given the high rate of divorce in Western cultures, and the existence of divorce in all cultures, it is obvious that staying together is neither automatic nor inevitable. Rivals loom on the periphery, waiting for an opportunity to mate-poach. Existing mates sometimes fail to provide the promised benefits. Some start imposing costs that become too burdensome to bear. Couples are surrounded by people who have agendas at odds with their own and who attempt to loosen or fracture their bond. Staying together can be difficult unless the couple undertakes strategies designed to ensure a successful, committed union.

Mate-keeping tactics occupy an important place in nonhuman animal mating. Although they are phylogenetically far removed from humans, insects offer instructive contrasts with humans because of the great diversity of their tactics and because human ways of solving the adaptive problem of keeping a mate are strikingly analogous to those of insects.1 One of the most frequent strategies insects use is to conceal their mate from competitors. Concealment tactics include physically removing a mate from an area dense with competitors, covering up the attractive cues of a mate, and reducing the conspicuousness of the courtship display. Male wasps who successfully follow the scents of a female to her perch immediately whisk her away to prevent the mating attempts of other males who may also be tracking her scent.2 If the male wasp fails to remove the female, he risks a physical battle with other males who converge on the perch. Male beetles release a scent that reduces their mate’s attractiveness, preventing other males from noticing the female or making it more likely that other males will search for unmated females. A male cricket starts out with loud calls, but he softens them as he gets close to the female in order to avoid alerting competitors to their union and the interference that might follow.3 All of these concealment tactics reduce a mate’s contact with potential interlopers.

Another strategy is to physically prevent a takeover by other males. Many insects maintain close contact with the mate and repel interfering competitors. The male veliid water strider, for example, grasps his mate and sometimes rides on her back for hours or days, even while not copulating, to prevent encroachment. Faced with rival males, insects may use their antennae to lash out at them, turn and wrestle with them, or simply chase them off.4 Perhaps the most unusual form of physical interference is the insertion of copulatory plugs. One species of worm, for example, adds a special substance to the seminal fluid that coagulates once deposited in the female, preventing other males from inseminating her and literally cementing his own reproductive bond with her. And in one species of fly, the Johannseniella nitida, males leave their genitalia broken off from their own bodies after copulation to seal the reproductive opening of the female. These adaptations to hinder sperm competition illustrate the extraordinary lengths to which males go to prevent reproductive takeovers by rivals.5

Although humans and insects are only distantly related, the basic adaptive logic behind holding on to a mate shows striking parallels. Males in both cases strive to inseminate females and to prevent cuckoldry. Females in both cases strive to secure investments in return for mating access. But human mate retention tactics take on uniquely intricate forms of psychological manipulation that set them apart from the rest of the animal kingdom.

Humans differ from most nonhuman animals in forming long-term and highly committed mateships. Remaining bonded is crucial for women and men alike. Although mate-keeping tactics among insects are performed primarily by males, among humans both men and women use them. Indeed, women are equal to men in the effort they channel toward the adaptive problem of staying together. This equality follows from the evolutionary logic of the value of the reproductive resources that would be lost by a breakup compared with the potential gains an individual could accrue by a breakup. Because men and women who embark on a committed relationship tend to couple with individuals of equivalent desirability, the 8’s with other 8’s and the 6’s with other 6’s, both sexes lose equally, on average, as a result of a breakup.6


