Do Women Have Evolved Sexual Assault Defenses?

The feminist author Susan Griffin has written: “I have never been free of the fear of rape. From a very early age, I, like most women, have thought of rape as part of my natural environment—something to be feared and prayed against like fire or lightning. I never asked why men raped; I simply thought it one of the many mysteries of human nature.”73

Although the controversy over the scientific study of rape has focused primarily on what motivates men to force sex on women, almost lost in the furor is attention to the psychology of rape victims. There is one point about victim psychology, however, on which all sides of the debate agree: rape is an abhorrent atrocity that typically inflicts heavy costs on victims. We need no formal theory to arrive at this insight. Nonetheless, it is important to determine why rape is experienced as extraordinarily traumatic.

From an evolutionary perspective, the costs of rape begin with the fact that it circumvents female choice, a core component of women’s sexual strategy. A raped woman risks untimely pregnancy with a man she has not chosen—a man who imposes himself against her will, a man who is unlikely to invest in her children, and a man who may have genes inferior to those she would otherwise have chosen. A raped woman risks being blamed, punished, or abandoned by her regular mate, who may suspect that her experience was consensual or that she somehow brought it on herself. The costs of being raped are dramatically illustrated in a case in Pakistan:

Zafran Bibi, a 26-year-old devout Muslim residing in Pakistan, was sentenced to death by stoning. Her crime was adultery, punishable by death according to Islamic law. The evidence: A child born more than a year after her husband had abandoned her, but had not yet divorced her. This was no ordinary adultery. Zafran Bibi had been raped by her brother-in-law, she testified. That did not matter. The birth of the illegitimate child proved adultery, according to the judge. Her accusation that her brother-in-law had raped her was tantamount to a criminal confession.74

Raped women suffer psychologically. They experience fear, humiliation, embarrassment, anxiety, depression, rage, and fury. They feel guilty, used, violated, and polluted. Women view forced sex as more upsetting to them than any of at least 147 other things that a man can do to hurt a woman, more upsetting even than savage nonsexual beatings at the hands of a man.75 Raped women also suffer in the aftermath. Some victims fear leaving their houses, avoid contact with men, isolate themselves socially, and live in a psychological prison with no apparent reprieve.

On top of the psychological torment, raped women suffer socially. As the case of Zafran Bibi illustrates, victims are sometimes held responsible for the crime perpetrated on them. They experience damage to their reputations. They suffer a loss in perceived desirability on the mating market. Their kin may reject or ostracize them for bringing shame on their family. They sometimes become socially shunned. Whatever the causes of rape, no one except the clueless and callused doubts the appalling damage it inflicts on the victim.

Given these often catastrophic costs, if rape has occurred throughout human history, it would defy evolutionary logic if selection had not fashioned defenses in women to prevent its occurrence. This is a separate issue from that of whether men have evolved adaptations to rape. Women could have evolved anti-rape adaptations, in principle, even if rape has been entirely a by-product of non-rape mechanisms. We can never determine with absolute certainty whether rape was frequent enough historically to have forged a female anti-rape psychology. But we can assemble available historical and cross-cultural evidence to make an educated guess. Written history dating back to the Bible brims with episodes of rape, and even specifications by religious leaders about the conditions under which men can sexually assault women. For example, the Sages of the Talmud, codified by Maimonides, provide this injunction:

A soldier in the invading army may, if overpowered by passion, cohabit with a captive woman . . . [but] he is forbidden to cohabit a second time before he marries her. . . . Coition with her is permitted only at the time when she is taken captive . . . he must not force her in the open field of battle . . . that is, he shall take her to a private place and cohabit with her.76

Although no systematic studies have been conducted on the occurrence and frequency of rape among traditional societies across cultures, an informal review of published ethnographies reveals that rape is reported in many of them—from the Amazonian jungle of Brazil to the more peaceful !Kung San of Botswana. The Semai of central Malaysia were frequently victimized by Malay raiders, who would ambush them, kill the men, and take the women by force.77 The Amazonian peoples studied by Thomas Gregor have special words for both rape (antapai) and gang rape (aintyawakakinapai).78 Rapes in war occurred as far back as there are written records, as amply documented by Susan Brownmiller in her classic treatise Against Our Will.79 Genghis Khan, more than 800 years ago, talked with relish about the gratification received through rape: “The greatest pleasure in life is to vanquish your enemies and chase them before you, to rob them of their wealth and see those dear to them bathed in tears, to ride their horses and clasp to your bosom their wives and daughters.”80 The evolutionary anthropologist Barbara Smuts summarizes the cross-cultural evidence in this way: “Although the prevalence of male violence against women varies from place to place, cross cultural surveys indicate that societies in which men rarely attack or rape women are the exception, not the norm.”81

A number of evolutionary scientists have been at the forefront in articulating potential evolved defenses against rape. Hypothesized anti-rape adaptations include:

•Psychological pain upon rape that motivates avoiding rape in the future

•Formation of alliances with males as “special friends” for protection

•Formation of female-female coalitions for protection

•Specialized fears that motivate women to avoid situations in which they might be in danger of rape

•The shunning of risky activities during ovulation to decrease the odds of sexual assault when conception is most likely

The first clue to the possibility that women have evolved adaptations to prevent being raped comes from two studies that analyzed the distribution of rapes across the female menstrual cycle. In one study of 785 rape victims, proportionately fewer women were raped during midcycle, defined as days 10 to 22 (an unfortunately wide and hence imprecise interval).82 Another study found that ovulating women were less often victims of sexual assault.83 To explore these patterns, Tara Chavanne and Gordon Gallup studied risk-taking among 300 undergraduate women.84 Women indicated whether they had engaged in each of eighteen activities that varied in their risk of making someone vulnerable to sexual assault. Going to church and watching television were examples of low-risk activities. Going to a bar and walking in a dimly lit area were examples of high-risk activities.

For women taking birth control pills, Chavanne and Gallup find no effect of menstrual cycle on risk-taking.85 Among women not taking the pill, however, ovulating women showed a decrease in risk-taking activities. Contending that risk avoidance is a candidate for an anti-rape adaptation, these authors successfully rule out several alternative explanations for the reduction in risk taking. For example, this reduction in risk taking is not a reflection of diminished sexual receptivity at ovulation; in fact, women usually peak in sexual motivation and receptivity at midcycle when they are with a consensual partner. Midcycle risk avoidance also cannot be attributed to a decrease in women’s general activity level, since pedometer-recorded activity level in women tends to increase during ovulation.86 In short, ovulating women appear to avoid behaviors that put them at increased risk of rape, suggesting the possibility of specialized risk avoidance as an anti-rape adaptation.

Many women routinely engage in risk-avoidance maneuvers to avoid putting themselves in harm’s way.87 In one study of urban women, 41 percent reported “isolation tactics,” such as not going out on the street at night, and 71 percent reported using “street-savvy tactics,” such as wearing shoes that would enable them to run away should they be attacked. In a study in Seattle, 67 percent of women said that they avoided certain dangerous locations of the city, 42 percent reported not going out unaccompanied, and 27 percent sometimes refused to answer their door. A study of Greek women reported that 71 percent avoided venturing out alone at night and 78 percent shunned dangerous locations within the city. Women also show wariness around men who talk about sex a lot, men who are sexually aggressive, and men who have a reputation for sleeping with a lot of women. Women report choosing public places for dates with men they do not know well. They intentionally avoid giving mixed sexual signals to certain men. They sometimes carry pepper spray, mace, whistles, or weapons. And they sometimes limit their drinking around men they do not know well.88

These risk avoidance strategies may be learned prudence measures, much like installing a burglar alarm after reading about a rash of burglaries in the neighborhood. Alternatively, risk avoidance may be motivated, in part, by a specialized fear of rape—a second potential anti-rape adaptation that induces women to avoid contexts conducive to sexual assault. Evidence for this specialized fear comes from a strong positive association between women’s reports of rape-fear and their reports of how many different behavioral precautions they take to avoid rape.89 Women who are fearful of rape, more than women who are less fearful, avoid being alone with men they do not know well, decline rides from men, leave when a man comes on too strong sexually, avoid outdoor activities when alone, and exercise caution in their drinking. One New Zealand study found that young women experience more fear of sexual assault than older women; older women’s fears were more likely to center on being robbed or burgled than on being raped.90 Women residing in neighborhoods with a high incidence of rape report more fear than those living in safer neighborhoods. These studies, of course, cannot determine whether women have evolved a specialized fear of rape contingent on their age and vulnerability, or whether these fears are expressions of more general mechanisms such as a rational appraisal of danger combined with fear mechanisms possessed by all people.

The psychologists Susan Hickman and Charlene Muehlenhard found that women were more fearful of being raped by strangers than by acquaintances. This difference occurred despite the fact that stranger rape is rare, accounting for only 10 to 20 percent of all rapes, compared with acquaintance rape, which is far more common, roughly 80 to 90 percent.91 Hickman and Muehlenhard conclude that women’s fears do not match the realities of rape. An alternative interpretation is that women’s apprehensions are actually effective: stranger fear motivates precautionary behaviors, lowering the real incidence of stranger rape below what it would have been without these functional fears. According to this view, women’s stranger fears function to prevent rape. Alternatively, women’s fear of stranger rape could have evolved in ancestral environments in warfare contexts in which rapists were, in fact, mostly strangers—very much unlike the modern environment. These hypotheses could both be partially true, and both remain to be empirically tested.

Sarah Mesnick and Margo Wilson have explored a third potential anti-rape adaptation, which they call the bodyguard hypothesis. According to this hypothesis, women form heterosexual pair-bonds with men in part to reduce their risk of sexual aggression from other men.92 According to the bodyguard hypothesis, women should be especially attracted to physically large and socially dominant men in contexts in which they are at risk of sexual aggression. To test the bodyguard hypothesis, Wilson and Mesnick studied 12,252 women, each interviewed over the phone by trained female interviewers. Questions about sexual assault began with: “Has a male stranger ever forced you or attempted to force you into any sexual activity by threatening you, holding you down or hurting you in some way?” Subsequent questions dealt with unwanted sexual touching: “[Apart from this incident you have just told me about], has a male stranger ever touched you against your will in any sexual way, such as unwanted touching, grabbing, kissing, or fondling?”93 The statistical analyses focused on sexual victimizations that had occurred within the twelve months prior to the interview and excluded sexual assaults by husbands or boyfriends.

A total of 410 unmarried and 258 married women reported experiencing one or more of these sexual violations. Marital status proved to have a dramatic effect on sexual victimization. Among women in the youngest age bracket of eighteen to twenty-four, eighteen out of one hundred unmarried women reported sexual victimization by a stranger, whereas only seven out of every one hundred married women reported sexual victimization. Messick and Wilson conclude that their results support the bodyguard hypothesis, although they acknowledge that they have not identified the causal mechanism by which married women are less likely to be raped than comparably aged single women. The lower rape rates among married than single women might reflect lifestyle differences—single women might spend more time in public places, such as bars and parties where alcohol is consumed, rather than at home, making them more vulnerable to predatory rapists. It might reflect individual differences in mating strategies, whereby single women might be more likely to pursue short-term matings that place them in contexts where they are exposed to greater danger of sexual coercion. Or it might reflect the deterrent effects of husbands on potential rapists, as the bodyguard hypothesis suggests. The bodyguard hypothesis requires more direct tests: Are women especially likely to choose large, physically imposing men when living in social circumstances that indicate a relatively higher risk of rape? Are women with such men for partners less likely to be raped than women with less formidable partners? Although one study found that women put in crime-prone areas of a city ramp up their preferences for physically formidable mates, this shift appears to reflect a general anticrime protective reaction rather than a rape-specific defense.94

A fourth hypothesized anti-rape adaptation is specialized psychological pain, articulated in Thornhill and Palmer’s A Natural History of Rape.95 According to this hypothesis, the psychological trauma that women experience from rape motivates them to avoid similar recurrences in the future. Evidence for this hypothesis comes from a study that purports to show that the women who experience the most intense pain and psychological trauma from rape are (a) young and fertile women rather than prepubescent girls or postmenopausal women, (b) married rather than single women, and (c) victims who were vaginally raped rather than orally or anally raped. Furthermore, (d) women who experience the most visible signs of physical violence during rape experience the least psychological pain, presumably because they would be less likely to be blamed for or suspected of complicity in the rape. An advocate of the psychological pain hypothesis might have added an additional prediction—(e) that women raped by men low in mate value (for example, men who are unattractive and of low socioeconomic status) will experience more psychological trauma than women raped by men higher in mate value (more attractive and higher-status men).

Regardless of these points of theoretical and empirical contention, one thing is quite clear—sound scientific evidence is lacking on the specifics of women’s defenses against rape. Research is urgently needed on women’s anti-rape strategies and their relative effectiveness, whether or not such strategies ultimately turn out to be specialized evolved adaptations or products of more general cognitive and emotional mechanisms.


