Ambition and Industriousness

Which tactics do people use to elevate their position in status hierarchies? My lab discovered twenty-six distinct tactics, including deception, social networking, sexual favors, education, and industriousness. The industriousness tactic included actions such as putting in extra time and effort at work, managing time efficiently, prioritizing goals, and working hard to impress others. Among all the tactics, industriousness proved to be the best predictor of past and anticipated income and promotions. Those who worked hard achieved higher levels of education and higher annual salaries, and they anticipated greater salaries and promotions than those who failed to work hard—findings as solid in Norway as in the United States.30 Industrious and ambitious men secure a higher occupational status than lazy, unmotivated men do.31

American women far more often than men desire mates who enjoy their work, show career orientation, demonstrate industriousness, and display ambition.32 The 852 single American women and 100 married American women in the thirty-seven-culture study unanimously rated ambition and industriousness as important or indispensable. Women regard men who lack ambition as extremely undesirable, whereas men view the lack of ambition in a wife as neither desirable nor undesirable. Women are likely to discontinue a long-term relationship with a man if he loses his job, lacks career goals, or shows a lazy streak.33

Women in the overwhelming majority of cultures similarly value ambition and industry more than men do, typically rating it as between important and indispensable. In our study, for example, Taiwanese women rated ambition and industriousness as 26 percent more important than men did, women from Bulgaria rated it as 29 percent more important, and women from Brazil rated it as 30 percent more important.

The cross-cultural and cross-generational evidence supports the key evolutionary expectation that women have evolved a preference for men who show signs of the ability to acquire resources and a disdain for men who lack ambition. Hard work and ambition, however, are not the only available cues to potential resources. Two others, dependability and stability, provide critical information about how steady or erratic these resources will be.


