Adaptations for Breaking Up

Ancestral conditions that favored breakups posed recurrent adaptive challenges over human evolutionary history. People who were oblivious to a decrease in their mate’s value, who were totally unprepared to find a new mate in the event of their mate’s death, or who failed to trade up to a higher-quality mate when offered the opportunity would have been at a tremendous reproductive disadvantage compared with those who perceived and acted on these conditions.

It may be disconcerting to acknowledge it, but most people continue to assess outside options while in a committed relationship. Men’s banter, when it does not center on sports or work, often revolves around the appearance and sexual availability of women in their social circles. Married women talk as well about which men are attractive, available, and high in status. These discussions accomplish the critical goals of exchanging information and assessing the mating terrain. It pays to monitor alternatives with an eye toward mating opportunities. Those who stick it out with an undesirable mate through thick and thin may receive our admiration, but their kind would not have reproduced as successfully in ancestral times and are not well represented among us today. Men and women evaluate alternative mating possibilities even if they have no immediate intention to act on them. It pays to plan ahead.

Mate preferences continue to operate during marriage, being directed not just at comparing the array of potential mates but at comparing those alternatives with the current mate. Men’s preference for young, attractive women does not disappear once they make a long-term commitment to a mate; nor does women’s attention to the status and prestige of other men. Indeed, one’s mate provides a handy standard for repeated comparisons. Research from my lab, spearheaded by Dan Conroy-Beam, discovered that happiness in a mateship is partly determined by the discrepancies between one’s partner’s mate value and the value of alternative mates in the local environment. People assess how well their mates stack up to the competition and become unhappy if their mates suffer by these comparisons.8 A decision to keep or get rid of one’s mate depends on the outcome of these calculations, which may not be made consciously.

A man whose increased status opens up better mating alternatives does not think to himself, Well, if I leave my current wife, I can increase my reproductive success by mating with younger, more reproductively valuable women. He simply finds other women increasingly attractive and his current relationship less satisfactory. A woman whose mate abuses her does not think to herself, My reproductive success and that of my children will increase if I leave this cost-inflicting mate. She thinks instead that she had better get herself and her children to safety. Our mateship dissolution adaptations operate without our awareness of the adaptive problems they solve.

People typically need a clear, socially acceptable justification for leaving a long-term mate, one that explains the breakup to friends, to family, and even to themselves. They need a public rationale that preserves, or minimizes the damage to, their social reputation. Although some simply walk away from a relationship, people rarely use this straightforward solution. One effective tactic for expelling a mate, in evolutionary psychological terms, would be to violate the mate’s expectations, so that the mate no longer desired to maintain the relationship. That is, rather than leaving themselves, some people try to drive their partner to take that step. Ancestral men could withhold resources or give signals that investments were being channeled to other women. Women could decrease a man’s certainty of paternity by engaging in infidelities or simply withholding sex from him. Cruel, unkind, inconsiderate, malevolent, harmful, or caustic acts would be effective tactics for expelling a mate for both women and men because such acts violate the universal preferences held by both of them for mates who are kind and empathic. These tactics have in common the exploitation of existing psychological mechanisms in the other sex—adaptations that alert people to the possibility that they have chosen a mate unwisely, or that their mate has changed in unwanted ways, and that perhaps they should cut their losses.

The sex differences in benefits from long-term matings in ancestral times, whereby men’s benefits came from monopolizing a woman’s reproductive capacity and women’s from monopolizing a man’s investments, have profound implications for the causes of separation and divorce. They imply that men and women evaluate changes in their mates over time by very different standards. As a woman ages from twenty-five to forty, for example, she experiences a rapid decline in her reproductive value, although other components of her mate value may increase and compensate for the loss. During a comparable period a man may elevate himself in status and so enjoy an unanticipated avalanche of mating opportunities. Or he may suffer losses and become desperate to keep his current mate. Ancestral men and women broke up, however, for somewhat different reasons that go to the core of the adaptive problems that each gender must solve to mate successfully.

A major source of evidence on breaking up comes from the most extensive cross-cultural study ever undertaken on the causes of divorce. The evolutionary anthropologist Laura Betzig analyzed information from 160 societies and identified forty-three causes of conjugal dissolution recorded by ethnographers who had lived in the society or by native informants who resided in each culture.9 Various constraints, such as the lack of a standard method of gathering data and incomplete data, preclude calculation of the absolute frequencies of the causes of divorce. Nonetheless, the relative frequencies are readily available, and as the number of societies revealing a particular cause of divorce increases, the more likely it is that this cause is a universal cause of divorce. Topping the list of causes of divorce are two key events with direct relevance to reproduction—infidelity and infertility.


