Emotional Manipulation

When tactics such as providing resources, love, and kindness fail, people sometimes resort to desperate emotional tactics to retain their mates, particularly if they are lower in mate value. Examples are crying when the partner indicates interest in others, making the partner feel guilty about such interest, and telling the partner that they are hopelessly dependent on him or her.

Submission or self-abasement is another tactic of emotional manipulation. For example, people may go along with everything their mate says, let that person have his or her way, and promise to change—a desperation tactic if there ever was one. In spite of the common stereotype that women are more submissive than men, the mate retention studies show the opposite in mate retention tactics. Men submit to, and abase themselves before, their mates roughly 25 percent more than women do. This gender difference shows up among college dating couples, among newlywed couples, and even among couples after several years of marriage. The gender difference in self-abasement cannot be attributed to a male reporting bias, because their spouses corroborate those reports.

Precisely why men submit and self-abase more than women remains a puzzle. Perhaps a man who perceives himself to be lower in mate value than his partner uses submission to try to prevent her from ditching him. Perhaps the tactic represents an attempt to placate a woman who is on the verge of leaving. But these speculations are not satisfactory because they do not answer the question of why men need to resort to this tactic more than women. Only future research can unravel the answer to this mystery.

Another emotional manipulation is intentionally trying to provoke sexual jealousy with the goal of keeping a mate. This tactic includes actions such as dating others to make a mate jealous, talking with people of the opposite sex at parties to incite jealousy, and showing an interest in people of the opposite sex to make a mate angry. People perceive these tactics to be nearly twice as effective for women as for men. A woman who flirts with other men in order to elicit jealousy and thereby hold on to a mate, however, is walking a fine line: eliciting jealousy injudiciously might provoke either violence or abandonment if her mate perceives her as promiscuous.

Although women admit to inducing jealousy more than men do, not all women resort to this tactic. One study has identified a key context in which women do intentionally elicit jealousy.42 It examined discrepancies between partners in their emotional commitment to the relationship. Such discrepancies can signal differences in the desirability of the partners, since the less involved person is generally higher in mate value. Whereas 50 percent of the women who viewed themselves as more involved than their partner intentionally provoked jealousy, only 26 percent of the women who were equally or less involved used this tactic. These women acknowledged that they were motivated to elicit jealousy in order to increase the closeness of the relationship, to test the strength of the relationship, to see if the partner still cared, and to inspire possessiveness. Discrepancies between partners in desirability, as indicated by differences in involvement in the relationship, apparently cause women to provoke jealousy as a tactic to gain information about, and to increase, men’s commitment.


