Possible Genetic Benefits of Short-Term Sex

It is also possible for women to gain superior genes through casual sex that are passed on to their children. Given men’s proclivities for opportunistic sex, the economics of the mating marketplace render it far easier for a woman to get a man from a higher stratum or with better genes to have sex with her than it is for her to get him to marry her. A woman might try to secure the investment of a lower-ranking man by marrying him, for example, while simultaneously securing the genes of a higher-ranking man by mating with him casually. This dual strategy apparently exists in Great Britain, where the biologists Robin Baker and Mark Bellis have discovered that women typically have affairs with men who are higher in status than their husbands.65

One version of the better genes theory has been called the “sexy son hypothesis.”66 According to this view, women prefer to have casual sex with men who are attractive to other women because they will have sons who possess the same charming characteristics. Women in the next generation will therefore find these sons attractive, and the sons will enjoy greater mating success than the sons of women who mate with men who are not regarded as attractive by most women.

Evidence for this theory comes from a study that identified key exceptions to women’s more stringent selection criteria for long-term partners. Women are more exacting with regard to physical attractiveness in a casual encounter than they are in a permanent mate.67 The preference for physically attractive casual sex partners may be a psychological clue to a human evolutionary history in which women benefited through the success of their sexy sons.

The strongest evidence of the good genes hypothesis comes from studies of women’s preference shifts when ovulating. Large-scale statistical reviews of the three dozen or so studies of cycle shifts find that ovulating women not on hormonal contraceptives do indeed show stronger preferences for masculine men, especially for masculine bodies and voices, as well as symmetrical men.68 Only women with mates low in genetic quality, however, stand to reap genetic benefits from an affair with a man who has the hypothesized good-genes indicators. And some researchers argue that other hypotheses better explain ovulation preference shifts. Ovulating women, for example, experience a higher sex drive, may feel sexier and more desirable, and so feel that they can successfully attract men of higher mate value.69 The next decade of research will undoubtedly delve more deeply into the hidden genetic benefits to women of pursuing a short-term sexual strategy.

One type of mating system puts sharp constraints on women’s short-term mating and any benefits that might accrue from them—arranged marriages. Although we can never know for sure, anthropologists believe that many women during human evolutionary history did not contract their own marriages; the evidence for this belief is the prevalence of marriages arranged by fathers and other kin in today’s tribal cultures, which are assumed to resemble the conditions under which humans evolved.70 The practice of arranged marriage is still common in many other parts of the world as well, such as India, Kenya, and the Middle East. Arranged marriages restrict the opportunities for women to reap the benefits of short-term mating. Even where matings are arranged by parents and kin, however, women often exert some influence over their sexual and marital decisions by manipulating their parents, carrying on clandestine affairs, defying their parents’ wishes, and sometimes eloping. These forms of personal choice open the window to the benefits for women of short-term mating, including genetic benefits, even when their marriage is arranged by others.


