Changes in a Woman’s Mate Value

Because a woman’s desirability as a mate is strongly determined by cues to her reproductivity, that value generally diminishes as she gets older. The woman who attracts a highly desirable husband at age twenty will typically attract a less desirable husband at age forty. This downturn is shown in societies where women are literally purchased by men in return for a bride-price, as occurs among the Kipsigis in Kenya.2 The bride-price consists of quantities of cows, goats, sheep, and Kenyan shillings that a groom or his family pays to the bride’s family in exchange for the bride. A prospective groom’s father initiates negotiations with the father of the prospective bride, making an initial offer. The bride’s father considers all competing offers. He then counters by demanding a higher bride-price than was offered by any of the suitors. Negotiations can last several months. A final suitor is selected by the bride’s father, and a final price is set, depending on the perceived quality of the bride. The higher the reproductive value of the bride, the greater the bride-price she is able to command. Older women, even if older by only four or five years, command a lower bride-price. Several other factors lower a woman’s value to a prospective husband and hence lower her price as a potential bride, such as poor physical condition or a physical handicap, pregnancy, and the prior birth of children by another man.

The Kipsigis’ custom of placing a premium on the youth and physical condition of a woman is not unique. In Tanzania, for example, the Turu refund a portion of the bride-price in the event of a divorce, and older wives command less of a refund owing to the physical “depreciation of the wife’s body.”3 In Uganda, the Sebei pay more for young widows than for old widows, stating explicitly that an older widow has fewer reproductive years left.4

The effect of aging on a woman’s mate value shows up in the changing perceptions of attractiveness through life. In one study in Germany, thirty-two photographs were taken of women ranging in age from eighteen to sixty-four.5 A group of 252 men and women, from sixteen to sixty years of age, then rated each photograph for its attractiveness on a 9-point scale. The age of the subjects of the photographs strongly determined judgments of female attractiveness, regardless of the age or sex of the rater. Young women drew the highest ratings, old women the lowest. These age effects are even more pronounced when men do the ratings. The change in the perceived attractiveness of women as they move through life is not an arbitrary aspect of a particularly sexist culture. Rather, this change in perceptions reflects the universal psychological adaptations in men that equate cues to a woman’s youth with her value as a mate.

There are many exceptions, of course. Some women, because of their status, fame, money, personality, or social networks, are able to remain desirable as they age. The American supermodel Cindy Crawford strikes many as looking more desirable at age fifty than most women at age twenty. The averages mask a wide variability in individual circumstances. Ultimately, a person’s value as a mate is an individual matter and is determined by the particular needs, values, and circumstances of the individual making the selection. Consider the real-life case of a highly successful fifty-year-old business executive who had six children with his wife. She developed a debilitating disease and died young. He subsequently married a woman three years older than himself, and his new wife devoted a major share of her effort to raising his children. To this man, a younger woman who had less experience in child rearing and who wanted children of her own would have been less valuable and might have interfered with his goal of raising his own children. A fifty-three-year-old woman may be especially valuable to a man with children and less valuable to a man with no children who wants to start a family. To the individual selecting a mate, averages are less important than particular circumstances.

The same woman can have a different value to a man when his circumstances change. In the case of the business executive, after his children reached college age, he divorced the woman who had helped raised them, married a twenty-three-year-old Japanese woman, and started a second family. His behavior may have been ruthless and not very admirable, but his circumstances had changed. From his individual perspective, the value of his second wife decreased precipitously when his children were grown, and the attractiveness of the younger woman as his third wife increased to accompany his new circumstances.

Although averages can obscure individual circumstances, they do give the broad outlines of the lifetime trends of many people. Furthermore, they suggest the adaptive problems that have shaped the human psychology of mating. From the wife’s perspective, as her direct reproductive value declines with age, her reproductive success becomes increasingly linked with nurturing her children, the vehicles that transport her genes into the future. From her husband’s perspective, her parenting skills constitute a valuable and virtually irreplaceable resource. Women often continue to provide economic resources, domestic labor, social status, and other resources, many of which decline less dramatically with age than her reproductive capacity and some of which increase. Among the Tiwi tribe, for example, older women can become powerful political allies of their mates, offering access to an extended network of social alliances and even helping their husbands acquire additional wives.6 But from the perspective of other men on the mating market, an older woman’s desirability as a prospective mate is generally low, not only because her direct reproductive value has declined but also because her efforts may already be monopolized by the care of her existing children and eventually her grandchildren.


