Conflict Among Multiple Wives

Polygyny is a widespread practice across cultures. An analysis of 853 cultures revealed that 83 percent of them permitted polygyny. In some West African societies, 25 percent of all older men have two or more wives simultaneously.28 Even in cultures in which polygyny is not allowed legally, it sometimes occurs. One study estimated that there are 25,000 to 35,000 polygynous marriages in the United States, mostly in western states.29 Another study of 437 financially successful American men found that some maintained two separate families, each unknown to the other.30

From a woman’s perspective, a major drawback of her husband taking additional wives is that resources channeled to another wife and her children are denied to her and her children. Although co-wives may derive significant benefits from one another’s presence, such as help with raising children, often one wife’s gain is another wife’s loss. The cross-cultural study on conjugal dissolution found polygyny to be a cause for divorce in twenty-five societies, largely because of conflict among the man’s co-wives.

Conflict among co-wives may have been an adaptive problem that polygynous men in ancestral times had to solve to maintain control over their wives. The problem was how to keep all wives happy so that none left; defection would deprive the man of significant reproductive resources. Some polygynous men adopted strict rules about resource distribution, offering each wife equal attention and equal sex. Among the Kipsigis in Kenya, wives of polygynous husbands have their own plots of land, which are divided equally among them by the husband.31 Kipsigis men maintain a separate residence apart from their wives, and they alternate the days spent with each wife, carefully allocating time equally. One writer on ancient Islamic cultures in the Middle East concluded: “You should have four wives if your fortune warrants it, and if you can give each one of the four the same attention, like sum for her necessaries, and a separate household.”32 All these tactics tend to minimize conflict among co-wives. Sororal polygyny, in which co-wives are sisters, also tends to minimize conflict, suggesting that genetic relatedness creates a convergence in the interests of women.33

Despite men’s efforts to keep peace among co-wives, women in societies such as Gambia often leave their husbands when they indicate that they plan to acquire a second wife, even though polygyny is legal.34 Wives find it difficult to share their husband’s time and resources with other women.


