Resource Investment

In addition to emotional commitment, couples also skirmish over the investment of time, energy, and resources. Neglect and unreliability are manifestations of commitment conflicts. More than one-third of all dating and married women complain that their partners neglect them, reject them, and subject them to unreliable treatment. Among their common complaints are that men do not spend enough time with them, fail to call when they say they will, show up late, and cancel arrangements at the last minute. Roughly twice as many women as men complain about these events. Approximately 38 percent of dating women, for example—but only 12 percent of dating men—complain that their partners sometimes fail to call them when they say they will.18

Upset over neglect and unreliability reflects a conflict over investment of time and effort. It takes effort to be on time. Reliability requires relinquishing time and resources that could be channeled toward other goals. Neglect signals a low investment, indicating that the man lacks the depth of commitment necessary to perform acts that require even minimal cost for the woman’s benefit.

Marriage does not extinguish conflict over investments. Indeed, as the marriage progresses from the newlywed year to the fourth year, women’s complaints about neglect and unreliability increase. Roughly 41 percent of newlywed women and 45 percent of women married for four years express irritation that their partners do not spend enough time with them. The analogous figures for men are only 4 percent during the newlywed year and 12 percent during the fourth year of marriage.19

The flip side of the coin of neglect is dependency and possessiveness. Conflict develops when one mate absorbs so much energy that the partner’s freedom is restricted. A common grievance of married men, far more than of married women, is that their spouse takes up too much of their time and energy. Thirty-six percent of married men, in contrast with only 7 percent of married women, express irritation that their spouse demands too much of their time. Twenty-nine percent of married men, but only 8 percent of married women, complain that their mates demand too much attention.20

These gender differences in demands on time and attention reflect a continuing conflict about investment. Women try to sequester their mate’s investment. Some men resist monopolization, striving to channel a portion of their effort toward other adaptive problems such as raising their status or acquiring additional mates. More than three times as many men as women voice possessiveness complaints. For men, historically, there was a large and direct reproductive payoff to preserving some investment for acquiring status and additional mates. For women, the benefits were smaller, less direct, and often more costly because they risked the loss of the existing mate’s investment of time and resources. Wives may be possessive and demanding because they do not want their husband’s limited investment to be diverted away from them.

Another manifestation of investment conflict centers on grievances about a partner’s selfishness. Among married couples, 38 percent of men and 39 percent of women complain that their partner acts selfishly. Similarly, 37 percent of married women and 31 percent of married men lament their partner’s self-centeredness. The core of selfishness centers on allocating resources to oneself at the expense of others, such as a spouse or children. Complaints about self-centeredness rise dramatically during the course of marriage. During the first year of marriage, only 13 percent of women and 15 percent of men complain that their partner is self-centered. By the fourth year of marriage, the numbers more than double.21

To understand these dramatic changes, consider the critical signals of investment during the courting stage. Effective courting communicates a willingness to put a mate’s interests before your own, or at least on par with your own. These cues are powerful tactics for attracting a mate and are displayed most floridly while courting. After the mateship is reasonably secure, the tactics signaling selflessness subside because their initial function of attracting a mate recedes. Each gender becomes freer to indulge the self and to channel less effort toward the partner. This is what long-term couples mean when they grumble that their partner takes them for granted.

The picture is not a very pretty one, but humans were not designed by natural selection to coexist in mating bliss. They were designed for individual survival and genetic reproduction. The psychological mechanisms fashioned by these ruthless evolutionary criteria are sometimes selfish.

Conflicts over investment often center on money. A study of American couples found that money is one of the most frequent sources of conflict. Seventy-two percent of married couples fight about money at least once a year, with 15 percent fighting more than once a month.22 Interestingly, couples fight more about how the money they have is to be allocated than about how much money they have in their joint pool of resources.23

American men, far more often than women, complain that their spouse spends too much money on clothes. The percentage of men who express this grievance starts at 12 percent during the newlywed year and increases to 26 percent by the fourth year of marriage. In contrast, among women, only 5 percent during the newlywed year and 7 percent during the fifth year of marriage are bothered by their husband’s spending on clothes. Both, however, complain equally that their spouse spends too much money in general. Nearly one-third of men and women by the fourth year of marriage complain about their spouse’s overexpenditure of mutual resources.

More women than men complain that their spouse fails to channel the money they do earn to them, especially noting their failure to buy them gifts. By the fifth year of marriage, roughly one-third of married women voice this complaint; in contrast, only 10 percent of husbands express similar complaints.24 Conflict between the sexes corresponds remarkably well with the initial gender-linked preferences in a mate. Women select mates in part for their economic resources and, once married, complain more than men that those resources are not forthcoming or abundant enough.


