Chapter　Nineteen


DURING　THE　SUMMER　the　sunrise　flag　was　flown　in　many　places　in　the　Pacific　and　in　the　South　Seas.Many　green　islands　with　their　sugar-cane　fields　and　their　rubber　trees　knelt　to　the　descendants　of　the　Sun　God，but　the　short-legged　soldiers　were　not　much　seen　in　Peiping.They　came　and　went　always　in　the　night.They　no　longer　dared　march　in　the　sunlight　because　their　uniforms　were　patched　and　their　shoes　were　broken.The　Imperial　Army　had　turned　into　a　horde　of　ragamuffins.

Although　the　Imperial　Army　marched　in　the　night　to　cover　its　shabbiness　the　Japanese　people　living　in　Peiping　still　showed　their　ugly　manners.In　the　markets，in　the　residential　streets，those　Japanese　women　who　walked　with　their　heads　bent　and　wore　gaeta　began　to　snatch　goods.They　would　go　in　groups　of　three　or　five　to　the　market　and　surround　a　vegetable　or　fruit　stand.One　would　take　a　cabbage　and　another　would　take　cucumbers　and　put　them　in　their　baskets.The　others　would　not　be　idle　but　would　stuff　eggplant　or　squash　into　their　sleeves.Snatching　in　this　way　they　would　chatter　like　beautiful　porcelain　dolls　and　smilingly　separate　and　go　away.

The　grain　they　received，although　it　was　better　and　more　than　that　given　to　the　Chinese，was　still　not　enough.The　victorious　and　the　defeated　had　both　become　poor　devils.The　simplest　way　was　to　snatch　food.The　Chinese　police　did　not　interfere，the　gendarmes　would　not　question　them，and　the　peddlers　dared　not　stop　them.

Their　vanguard　were　the　ronins　from　Korea　—　slaves　with　higher　qualifications.They　not　only　robbed　and　snatched　but　also　destroyed　goods.They　would　eat　a　melon　or　two　without　paying　and　then　smash　a　few　more.With　such　a　vanguard　before　them　the　Japanese　women　could　feel　that　their　manners　were　not　so　low　—　they　robbed　only　and　did　not　destroy.

Ever　since　the　summer　began，the　people　of　the　Little　Sheep　Fold　had　to　do　without　peddlers　of　vegetables　and　fruit.The　peddlers　were　afraid　of　the　Japanese　women　in　house　Number　Three　who　would　snatch　and　rob.

So　the　Chinese　women，like　Yun　Mei，lost　the　convenience　of　buying　onion　or　spinach　outside　their　own　gates.If　they　wanted　but　a　clove　of　garlic　they　had　to　run　to　the　main　street，and　besides　—　after　being　robbed　by　the　Koreans　or　the　Japanese　women　—　the　peddlers　would　make　up　their　losses　from　the　Chinese.They　raised　their　prices.It　seemed　to　Yun　Mei　that　she　had　to　pay　a　snatch　tax.

From　the　time　of　Fourth　Master　Li's　death，Sergeant　Pai　had　become　more　and　more　melancholy.He　could　make　excuses　for　himself，but　no　matter　how　he　thought　he　could　not　feel　that　he　had　dealt　rightly　with　Fourth　Master　Li.It　was　he　who　had　persuaded　the　old　man　to　become　Head　of　the　Li.It　was　he，when　the　Japanese　gendarmes　were　striking　the　old　man，who　had　not　tried　to　stop　them.He　had　to　go　to　the　Little　Sheep　Fold　on　patrol　but　he　was　afraid　of　meeting　Fourth　Mistress　Li　and　her　son.If　he　met　them　he　would　hang　his　head　and　lower　his　eyelids.He　was　no　longer　a　handsome　police　sergeant;he　was　a　petty　thief　who　had　stolen　his　life　in　shame　and　misery　and　ignominy.

He　gave　instructions　to　his　men　not　to　interfere　with　the　stealing　of　the　Koreans　and　the　Japanese　women.“If　we　report　or　interfere　with　them　those　arrogant　Things　will　say　to　put　the　peddlers　in　prison.To　shut　our　eyes，brothers，is　the　best　way　to　manage.All　Peiping　has　been　taken　by　them.What　standards　can　be　used　to　judge　right　from　wrong？”

For　Head　of　the　Little　Sheep　Fold　Li　he　had　thought　of　Chi　Rey　Shuan　or　Cheng　Chang　Shun，but　he　knew　that　they　were　both　too　peaceable　and　would　not　know　how　to　deal　with　the　neighbors.

John　Ting　had　seen　the　vacancy　as　soon　as　Fourth　Master　Li　had　died.He　now　had　time，for　he　had　not　looked　for　work　after　coming　out　of　the　English　Palace.Having　worked　in　the　English　Palace　he　was　not　willing　to　work　in　the　foreign　food　restaurants.Even　if　he　had　been　willing　to　lower　his　standards，it　was　not　certain　that　he　would　have　been　able　to　find　work　because　most　of　the　foreign　food　restaurants　—　because　of　the　anti-American　and　anti-English　attitude　of　the　Japanese　—　had　closed.

Sergeant　Pai　did　not　like　John　Ting's　foreign　ways，　but　since　he　could　not　find　a　suitable　man　he　thought　it　best　to　nod　his　head.

Having　made　arrangements　for　Head　of　the　Li，Sergeant　Pai　was　still　without　peace　day　or　night.Stuck　in　his　mind　like　a　fish　bone　in　a　throat　was　his　age.

Although　he　shaved　meticulously　every　day　with　an　old　razor　and　cared　for　his　old　uniform　and　kept　the　old　leather　shoes　clean　and　neat，although　he　forced　himself　to　push　out　his　chest　when　he　walked，he　knew　that　these　could　not　disguise　his　aging　appearance.He　did　not　want　to　be　a　running　dog　for　the　Japanese，but　he　was　also　afraid　that　the　Japanese　would　dismiss　him.　When　he　was　patrolling，he　was　always　fearful　that　he　would　suddenly　meet　a　Japanese　who　would　say　to　him，“Roll　away！Who　wants　such　an　old　Thing　as　you　to　be　a　sergeant　of　police？”

What　troubled　him　even　more　was　that　after　the　Japanese　women　had　taken　to　snatching　goods，the　Chinese　had　also　learned　the　art.He　had　already　told　his　men　not　to　interfere　with　the　Japanese　and　the　Koreans.How　could　he　tell　them　they　must　interfere　with　the　Chinese　when　in　fact　the　Chinese　were　able　to　secure　less　than　the　Japanese？If　he　did　not　dare　to　interfere　with　the　Japanese　then　he　should　not　interfere　with　the　Chinese.

He　hung　his　head　and　said　to　his　men，“It　would　be　better　not　to　interfere　with　them　either.There　is　not　much　fat　on　our　stomachs.Who　does　not　know　the　feeling　of　hunger？If　we　arrest　them　the　Japanese　will　not　praise　us　for　doing　our　duty.The　prisons　are　full　already　and　there　is　no　grain.Well　—　I　will　say　it　again，`Open　one　eye　and　close　the　other.'　When　both　of　our　eyes　are　closed　and　never　open　again　perhaps　the　world　will　have　peace.”

The　scarcity　of　food　had　really　made　the　people　of　the　master　race　show　their　foxtails;　and　hunger　had　made　the　slaves　forget　the　sense　of　shame.Peiping's　hungry　people　cared　only　for　something　to　put　in　their　mouths.They　no　longer　cared　what　was　seemly.To　snatch　and　to　rob　became　common　practice.

In　the　Peiping　shops　selling　meat，both　cooked　and　raw，the　block　on　which　the　cooked　meat　and　sausages　were　cut　was　almost　as　high　as　a　man　was　tall.This　was　because　the　shopkeepers　were　afraid　that　the　customers　would　pick　the　meat　up　from　the　block　and　have　their　fingers　chopped　off.　But　now　these　high　blocks　—　like　half　a　large　tree　—　could　no　longer　stop　people's　hands.In　the　meat　shops　where　they　sold　fresh　raw　meat　they　had　in　the　past　cut　the　raw　meat　on　a　flat　board，because　no　matter　how　greedy　a　person　he　would　not　pick　up　raw　meat　or　fat　and　put　it　into　his　mouth.Now，however，there　were　those　who　made　a　practice　of　snatching　raw　meat.

The　meat　shops　had　not　had　much　business　from　the　time　the　Japanese　controlled　all　foodstuffs.For　three　days　or　perhaps　five　they　would　not　have　any　meat　to　sell　and　then，of　course，they　had　no　business.When，occasionally，they　had　some　meat　to　sell　they　would　cut　the　meat　in　the　night，and，whether　it　was　cooked　or　raw，chop　it　into　little　pieces　and　wrap　it　in　paper　or　lotus　leaves　and　hide　it　in　the　cupboard.Those　who　came　to　buy　had　first　to　hand　over　the　money　and　then　be　given　a　small　parcel　of　meat.

This　practice　of　money　first　and　goods　later　blew　like　a　gust　of　wind　over　the　whole　of　Peiping.If　one　did　not　first　show　money　he　could　not　buy　anything　at　all.

Those　who　sold　shaoping　and　chiaotse　and　the　peddlers　of　other　foodstuffs　all　covered　their　baskets　with　wire　nets　and　also　locked　the　covers　on　them.Those　who　wanted　to　buy　had　first　to　hand　over　the　money　and　then　the　peddlers　would　unlock　their　baskets　and　hand　over　the　goods.When　they　handed　over　the　goods　they　would　make　it　clear　to　the　customers　that　once　the　goods　were　in　the　hands　of　the　customers　the　peddlers　were　no　longer　responsible.This　was　because　there　were　often　people　waiting　beside　the　stands　or　the　peddlers'poles　and　baskets　to　snatch　the　food　as　it　passed　from　one　hand　to　another.

Yun　Mei　had　been　robbed　twice　and　so　did　not　dare　to　let　Little　Precious　go　to　buy　things　for　her.Although　the　things　she　had　lost　had　not　been　worth　much　she　had　been　frightened.

Mrs.Tien　Yiu　hesitatingly　suggested，“Why　not　take　Little　Precious　with　you？Four　eyes　can　do　more　business　than　two.”

Yun　Mei　felt　that　to　have　Little　Precious　with　her　—　whether　he　would　be　useful　or　not　—　would　add　to　her　courage，but　he　had　to　go　to　school.

“Ai，”Old　Man　Chi　sighed，“it　doesn't　matter　whether　he　goes　to　school　or　not　at　a　time　like　this！”

Little　Precious　was　proud　of　himself　when　he　heard　of　this　assignment，and　at　once　suggested　that　he　should　carry　a　stick.“If　anyone　grabs　your　sack，Mother，I　will　strike　him　with　my　stick.”

“You　calm　down，”Yun　Mei　said　between　smiles　and　tears.“Open　your　eyes　a　little　wider.That　is　what　we　will　need.Watch　all　the　time　and　shout　if　you　see　anyone　following　us.”

“For　the　police？”　Little　Precious　interrupted.

“Heng　—　if　the　police　took　any　notice　it　would　be　strange！”

“Then　what　shall　I　shout　for？”Little　Precious　wanted　to　have　everything　clear　so　he　could　carry　out　the　responsibility　for　protecting　his　mother.

“Whatever　you　want　to　shout　—　just　shout，”　the　grandmother　explained.

Old　Man　Chi　—　in　order　to　show　that　even　though　he　was　old　and　weak　he　still　had　wisdom　—　began　to　look　for　some　cord　and　pieces　of　cloth.When　he　had　found　them　he　said　to　Yun　Mei，“Tie　these　on　the　basket.When　you　have　bought　everything　tie　up　the　strings　as　is　done　on　the　traveling　baskets.Won't　that　make　it　safer？”

“What　you　have　thought　of，Grandfather，is　really　wise，”　Yun　Mei　said.She　did　not　say，“What　if　they　snatch　the　basket　also？”

Rey　Shuan，of　course，wanted　to　help.　On　his　way　back　from　school　he　would　buy　things　to　save　Yun　Mei　from　having　to　run　countless　times　to　the　shops，and　so　reduced　the　chances　for　being　robbed.

One　day　as　he　was　going　home　from　school　he　remembered　that　Yun　Mei　had　asked　him　to　bring　back　something　but　he　could　not　remember　what　it　was.

After　walking　awhile　he　saw　a　peddler　selling　shaoping　and　friedcakes.Before　the　war　the　shaoping　peddlers　were　as　common　as　sparrows，but　now　seeing　one　seemed　most　strange.The　wire　netting　on　the　basket　was　also　strange　and　new.

He　decided　to　buy　two　shaoping　and　two　friedcakes　to　lessen　the　guilt　of　having　forgotten　Yun　Mei's　request　and　also　to　please　Little　Niu　Niu.　She　still　wept　at　the　sight　of　Republic　flour.

As　he　walked　along　carrying　the　shaoping，and　friedcakes　he　thought　of　Mr.Goodrich.Did　not　Mr.Goodrich　constantly　give　Niu　Niu　cakes　or　bread？He　was　anxious　to　see　his　old　friend，although　he　knew　that　even　if　he　could　find　out　where　the　old　man　was　he　would　not　dare　go　see　him.He　knew　that　the　Japanese　especially　hated　the　Chinese　who　had　anything　to　do　with　Westerners.

As　he　was　thinking　these　thoughts　suddenly　a　hand　appeared　at　his　side，a　very　dirty　and　very　thin　hand.　Before　he　could　understand　what　was　happening　the　shaoping　and　the　friedcakes　were　gone.He　stopped　and　turned　around.

The　one　who　had　snatched　the　shaoping　was　a　very　thin　and　very　weak　man，running　with　all　he　had　in　him　and　yet　not　running　fast.

He　spat　several　times　on　the　shaoping　and　friedcakes，so　that　even　if　he　were　caught　he　would　not　need　to　return　the　food.

Rey　Shuan　caught　up　with　him.The　thin　man，like　an　old　hen　cornered，stood　still　with　his　face　against　the　wall.Rey　Shuan　was　sorry　he　had　run　after　him　when　he　saw　this　was　a　man　who　had　a　sense　of　shame.

“Friend，take　them　and　eat.I　don't　want　them.”　Rey　Shuan　said　this　gently，hoping　the　thin　man　would　turn　around.

The　thin　man　hid　his　face　even　more　closely　to　the　wall.

Rey　Shuan　wanted　to　say，“War　has　broken　our　souls，and　taken　away　the　skin　from　our　faces.This　is　not　your　fault　alone.”But　he　was　unable　to　say　it.He　felt　that　these　were　empty　words.There　was　no　reason　or　word　that　could　satisfy　hunger.He　said，“Friend，eat.”

The　thin　man　seemed　to　be　moved　and　slowly　turned　around.

Rey　Shuan　understood.This　was　Scholar　Yeh，the　brother-in-law　of　the　poet，Mr.Chien.Forgetting　everything　he　managed　to　say，“Mr.Yeh.”

Scholar　Yeh　bent　his　head，leaned　back　against　the　wall，and　stood　without　expression.　His　hair，which　had　not　been　cut　for　several　months，was　long　and　disordered　and　curled　on　his　head.His　face　was　so　thin　it　was　like　the　edge　of　a　knife　and　it　had　been　many　days　since　he　had　washed　it.There　were　no　tears　in　his　eyes　nor　was　there　any　expression　as　they　stared　at　the　friedcakes　in　his　hands.

Rey　Shuan　took　hold　of　Scholar　Yeh's　arm.Scholar　Yeh　wanted　to　free　his　arm　but　had　not　the　strength.Stumbling　he　went　along　with　Rey　Shuan.He　could　only　say，“Where　are　we　going？”

“We　will　find　a　place　to　sit　down，”　Rey　Shuan　said.

They　came　to　a　little　restaurant.As　they　went　in　a　waiter　stopped　them.“I'm　sorry，we　did　not　get　anything　today　so　we　have　not　lighted　the　fires.There　is　no　business.”

A　restaurant　without　a　fire，without　the　clatter　of　dishes，is　uglier　than　anything　else.The　tables　and　benches　were　set　in　an　orderly　manner　and　in　the　air　there　still　was　the　smell　of　fats　and　of　cooking　that　had　accumulated　over　many　years.

“Can　we　just　sit　awhile？”Rey　Shuan　asked　in　a　courteous　manner.“This　gentleman　is　a　little　unwell.”　He　pointed　to　Scholar　Yeh.

“Why　not，the　benches　are　empty，”the　waiter　smiled　and　said.“You　see，sir，how　can　we　do　business？There　is　nothing　to　sell　and　yet　we　have　to　keep　our　doors　open.It　is　a　jest.”

The　two　sat　down.Scholar　Yeh's　thin　face　had　become　thinner　and　seemed　longer.His　eyeballs　were　like　the　eyes　of　a　dead　fish.He　no　longer　fidgeted　but　sat　stupidly　and　without　motion.

Scholar　Yeh　sighed.“There　is　nothing　to　say　—　I　am　just　short　of　death.”As　he　spoke　the　muscles　of　his　face　moved　hardly　at　all.He　was　stating　a　fact　and　there　was　no　need　of　any　expression　to　help　him.

“I　have　ruined　everything，”Scholar　Yeh　said　quietly.“To　support　my　sick　wife　and　my　children　I　worked　for　the　Japanese，and　used　opium　to　numb　myself.Well　—　I　sold　my　soul　that　my　wife　and　children　should　not　starve.To　sell　a　soul　and　save　the　lives　of　a　whole　family　is　not　a　bad　bargain.”He　stopped　and　stared　dully　at　the　table.

Rey　Shuan　dared　not　urge　him　to　speak　but　only　coughed.

Scholar　Yeh　seemed　to　be　wakened　by　the　cough　and　went　on，“My　wife　—　it　was　strange　—　with　food　to　eat　was　weaker　than　ever，as　though　the　food　I　gave　her　were　poisonous.She　died.”There　was　still　no　expression　on　his　face　and　he　seemed　to　be　reciting　a　story　he　had　heard　many　times.“Those　who　are　dead　are　the　fortunate　ones.I　thought　that　when　my　sons　and　daughters　were　grown　and　could　earn　money　they　would　support　me.As　soon　as　my　eldest　son　began　to　earn　money，without　saying　a　word　he　left　Peiping.He　not　only　did　not　show　his　gratitude　but　he　seemed　to　hate　me，to　hate　me　for　selling　my　soul.Like　my　eldest　son，my　other　three　boys　also.I　sold　my　soul　to　bring　them　up　and　what　did　I　get　from　them？Emptiness　and　heartlessness.”He　moistened　his　thin　lips.

“There　are　so　many　funny　things　to　laugh　about.I　have　just　told　you　that　it　was　because　of　my　opium　habit　that　the　Japanese　treated　me　well.When　my　habit　became　so　strong　that　I　was　too　lazy　to　move，they　dismissed　me.I　lost　my　income　and　had　left　only　a　few　children　who　could　not　earn　money　and　who　will　probably　run　away　from　me　when　they　can　earn　money.I　cannot　care　for　them　any　longer　and　even　if　I　did　care　for　them　they　would　not　be　grateful　to　me.If　I　don't　care　for　them　they　will　starve，but　I　have　no　way　to　manage.　I　still　smoke　opium，and　the　opium　intoxicates　me　—　that　is　opium's　greatest　virtue.What　is　there　to　be　ashamed　of？I　am　a　man　whose　own　children　do　not　recognize　him　as　their　father.Today　I　robbed　you　but　I　need　not　apologize.I　know　that　you　will　forgive　one　about　to　die.”

“You　cannot　die　like　this.”　Rey　Shuan　wanted　to　help　him.

“No　one　should　die　like　this　but　I　must　die　this　way.Tomorrow，perhaps，I　will　lie　on　the　street　and　be　taken　away　in　the　big　truck　and　thrown　outside　the　city.I　have　no　hope　of　being　buried　in　the　ancestral　graveyard.I　could　not　face　my　ancestors.”He　stood　up　shaking　and　started　to　go　away.

When　they　were　outside　the　restaurant　Scholar　Yeh　sat　on　the　steps　and　began　to　eat　the　shaoping.





