Chapter　Twenty-two


YOUNG　MRS.CHIEN　sat　on　the　steps　of　the　house　and　held　her　head　in　her　hands.It　was　as　though　she　could　not　remember　clearly　what　had　happened　a　few　hours　before.As　she　tried　to　remember　she　stammered，“He　went　out　to　buy　something　to　eat　—　”

“Then　what？Speak.”　Wang　the　Third　was　becoming　impatient.

“Went　out　—　and　for　a　long　time　did　not　come　back.”

“Why　did　you　let　him　go　out　alone？”

She　did　not　want　to　argue.“I　thought　he　was　playing　and　eating　inside　the　gate.After　a　while　I　began　to　worry　and　went　to　see.He　was　not　there.I　went　to　the　street　to　look　for　him.I　looked　—　I　called　—　”　Again　she　bent　her　head.

Wang　the　Third　also　sat　down　on　the　steps.He　controlled　his　anger　and　tried　to　think.He　thought　a　long　time　and　then　began　to　tell　his　daughter　the　events　of　the　last　few　days，hoping　that　possibly　among　these　events，they　could　find　some　hint　of　the　cause　for　the　loss　of　the　child.

When　she　had　heard　her　father's　story　young　Mrs.Chien　stood　up.“The　child　has　been　stolen　by　the　Japanese.”

“Japanese？”

“They　have　arrested　my　father-in-law　and　stolen　my　child.With　the　child　beside　him　—　even　with　a　heart　of　iron　—　the　old　man　would　have　to　say　whatever　they　wanted　him　to　say.They　might　even　torture　my　child　to　death.You　are　good　—　for　those　three　houses　of　yours　you　have　wiped　out　the　Chien　family！”

Wang　the　Third　was　unable　to　say　a　word.Exhaustion，anger，shame，made　him　stare　stupidly　at　the　wall　of　the　compound.

Sergeant　Pai　came　the　next　day.He　told　Wang　the　Third　that　Mr.Chien　was　indeed　in　prison　but　had　not　been　tortured.

This　news　he　had　learned　from　the　fortune　papers　in　the　little　temple.On　the　fortune　papers　were　other　messages　but　he　could　not　tell　Wang　the　Third　of　these.

“Oh　—　he　hasn't　been　tortured.”　Wang　the　Third　smiled.

“Hum　—　the　Japanese　will　soon　be　defeated，they　dare　not　strike.His　mother's　—　！A　herd　of　Things　that　bully　the　weak　and　flee　from　the　tough！”

“But　my　grandson　is　lost.”　Wang　the　Third　stopped　smiling.

“Lost？”　Sergeant　Pai　stood　still.

“Lost.”

“Also　the　Japanese？”

Wang　the　Third　could　not　answer.He　wanted　only　to　slap　his　own　face　but　his　arm　was　too　heavy　to　lift.After　sitting　silent　a　long　time　he　asked，“Could　you　make　inquiries？”

Sergeant　Pai　knew　that　he　could　not　but　he　was　unwilling　to　refuse　and　leave　Wang　the　Third　without　hope.“I'll　try.I'll　do　the　best　I　can.”

Sergeant　Pai　took　his　leave.He　knew　that　the　trouble　in　the　Wang　family　was　very　serious　but　there　was　nothing　he　could　do.He　had　his　own　work.Rey　Shuan　and　he　had　deciphered　the　message　on　the　fortune　paper：

1.Mr.Chien　is　in　prison　but　has　not　been　tortured　because　the　Japanese　hope　to　persuade　him　to　join　them.

2.The　monk，Clear　Moon，for　the　time　being　cannot　be　active.Spies　follow　him　constantly.

3.Rey　Tang's　work　takes　him　more　and　more　outside　the　city　and　he　cannot　come　often　to　Peiping.

4.Rey　Shuan　should　take　over　Mr.Chien's　work　as　editor　of　the　underground　paper　and　find　ways　to　send　the　script　outside　the　city.A　smart　man　who　can　use　his　legs　is　required.

Rey　Shuan　was　willing　to　be　the　editor.Sergeant　Pai　was　willing　to　be　the　messenger.They　both　knew　that　the　work　might　cost　them　their　heads，but　both，without　the　slightest　hesitation，decided　to　accept　the　assignment.The　two　of　them　looked　with　complete　absorption　at　the　fortune　paper，and　then　looked　at　each　other　and　smiled　as　if　to　say，“If　one　must　die　it　is　happier　and　simpler　to　die　in　this　way.”

Sergeant　Pai　had　to　go　every　day　outside　the　city　with　the　script　and　bring　back　the　news.Every　day　he　had　to　change　his　route　and　every　day　he　had　to　change　his　make-up.He　had　a　small　peddling　business　for　camouflage.

He　came　often　to　the　Little　Sheep　Fold　but　not　to　see　Rey　Shuan.He　and　Rey　Shuan　had　already　planned　not　to　meet　in　the　neighborhood　of　the　Little　Sheep　Fold.He　came　to　visit　John　Ting.He　told　John　Ting　all　about　his　business，his　difficulties，and　other　little　matters，so　that　John　Ting　should　not　suspect　him.If　only　John　Ting　did　not　suspect　him　there　was　no　other　person　in　the　Little　Sheep　Fold　who　would　start　rumors　about　him.

Young　Mrs.Chien　went　on　the　streets　every　day　hunting　for　her　son.Her　life　was　divided　into　separate　halves　—　one　half　dead　and　the　other　half　alive.She　was　dead　to　food　and　drink　and　her　housework，but　she　lived　when　she　walked　and　shouted　as　she　went　to　all　parts　of　the　city　to　look　for　her　child.She　went　up　and　down　the　streets，　looking　to　the　east　and　to　the　west.Whenever　she　saw　a　boy　about　the　size　of　her　son　she　would　go　over　quickly，and　often　frightened　the　child.When　she　saw　that　he　was　not　her　son　she　would　not　cry　out　nor　would　she　say　anything，but　would　pat　the　child　very　lightly　on　the　head.

After　a　day　of　searching　she　would　go　home　as　if　by　instinct.She　would　not　say　a　word　to　her　father　—　it　was　as　if　he　were　no　longer　her　father.In　the　night　she　would　kneel　in　the　courtyard　and　murmur，“Father　of　my　child，protect　your　son.”She　could　say　only　this　one　sentence，and　would　repeat　it　over　and　over.

Wang　the　Third　clenched　his　big　fists　often　until　the　bones　ground.He　hired　people　to　help　him　look　for　the　child.Those　he　hired　—　beating　brass　gongs　—　went　into　all　the　residence　streets　and　shouted.He　also　asked　people　to　write　many　posters　which　he　put　up　in　all　parts　of　the　city.

The　Japanese　told　him　that　Mr.Chien　was　in　prison　and　being　treated　well，and　told　him　not　to　worry.The　best　way，the　Japanese　said，would　be　for　him　and　his　daughter　to　write　a　letter　to　Mr.Chien　urging　him　not　to　be　so　stubborn.If　Mr.Chien　would　co-operate　with　them，not　only　would　Mr.Chien　have　a　high　official　position　but　it　would　also　be　advantageous　to　Wang　the　Third.

Wang　the　Third　inquired　about　his　grandson.The　Japanese　only　smiled　slightly　and　said　nothing，and　so　he　knew　that　—　nine　chances　out　of　ten　—　the　child　had　been　stolen　by　them，and　that　if　Mr.Chien　were　determined　not　to　co-operate　then　would　then　deal　with　the　child.Wang　the　Third　could　only　promise　to　write　to　Mr.Chien.If　the　letter　had　any　effect　perhaps　the　child　would　not　suffer　for　the　time　being.He　asked　a　friend　to　write　the　letter　and　gave　it　to　the　Japanese.

When　he　had　delivered　the　letter　he　regretted　it.He　knew　the　disposition　of　his　relative　—　how　strong　and　stubborn　it　was.Suppose　that　seeing　his　letter　Mr.Chien　was　even　more　determined　not　to　co-operate　with　the　Japanese，would　Wang　the　Third　not　have　killed　the　child？

He　went　again　to　plead　with　the　Japanese　to　let　him　go　and　see　Mr.Chien.He　thought　that　if　once　he　could　see　his　relative　he　could　explain　everything，and　be　forgiven；but　the　Japanese　shook　their　heads.





