First　Act,　Second　Scene


Time:　half　a　month　later.

Place:　country　of　the　north.

Stage　setting:　On　the　left　of　the　stage　there　are　two　pine　trees,　they　are　the　beginning　of　the　forest　in　the　back　of　them.　In　front　of　the　trees　is　a　highway;　behind　the　road　very　formidable　looking　mountains　of　reddish　grey　color.　There　are　no　trees　on　the　mountains　but　only　very　few　shrubs　and　grass.　In　the　background　more　mountains　are　visible　making　a　deep　yellow　outline　against　the　sky.

Characters:　Wang　Ta-ch'eng,　Ting　Te-sheng,　Li　Chan-yuan,　Sung　Ming-liang,　Little　K'an,　Fourth　Dog,　and　a　few　hired　hands.　When　the　curtain　rises　Little　K'an　and　the　Fourth　Dog　stood　before　the　pine　trees.

Little　K'an's　jacket　and　trousers　are　made　of　unbleached　white　cotton.　His　coat　is　unbuttoned,　his　belt　is　very　tight,　making　his　waist　narrow　and　shoulders　broad.　He　is　not　too　tall,　but　very　strong.　His　head　is　like　a　melon　with　angles.　His　hair　is　shaved　off　up　to　the　crown　of　his　head　and　his　pigtail　is　braided　very　tightly.　His　hairdo　is　a　sign　of　a　rough　individual.　There　is　a　revolver　stuck　in　his　belt.

Fourth　Dog　is　taller　than　Little　K'an　and　his　muscles　are　very　strong　too.

He　is　coatless,　only　a　pair　of　black　trousers.　In　his　hand　there　is　a　big　stick.

FD:　I　tell　you　Little　K'an,　I　am　quitting　this　job.

LK:　Well,　you　agreed　with　me　when　we　started　out,　now　you　are　scared.

FD:　Only　a　fool　is　afraid,　I　am　just　being　careful.

LK:　Cautiousness　is　also　a　sign　of　being　afraid.

FD:　In　the　past　whenever　we　robbed　a　passer-by,　did　you　ever　see　me　being　scared？

LK:　No,　you　did　not　knit　your　brows,　you　were　only　trembling　all　over.

FD:　Whenever　I　talk　to　you　seriously　you　always　joke:　I　am　saying　that　in　the　past,　the　two　of　us　being　so　strong,　we　could　rob　a　passer-by　just　as　easily　as　picking　up　a　cucumber,　but　now,　well,　you　want　us　to　hold　up　a　whole　caravan　and　besides　it　is　Wang　Ta-ch'eng's　caravan.　You　cannot　blame　me　for　being　careful　like　this.

LK:　You　have　not　figured　it　out　clearly.　How　much　can　a　single　passer-by　carry.　To　rob　a　single　man,　we　spent　a　lot　of　energy　and　get　a　few　strings　of　cash　which　is　really　not　enough　to　get　a　whore　even　once.　A　man　who　is　strong　should　really　hold　up　a　caravan　which　will　give　us　carloads　of　silver　and　piles　and　piles　of　goods.　Once　we　get　hold　of　them　we　can　live　comfortably　for　the　rest　of　our　lives.　Don't　you　want　to　get　a　carload　of　silver,　marry　a　girl　and　enjoy　yourself　for　a　few　years？

FD:　I　am　not　a　blockhead,　why　should　not　I　want　to　marry　and　enjoy　myself,　but　you　must　think　it　over　again,　how　terrifying　Master　Wang　is.　Is　there　anyone　in　the　world　who　does　not　know　him？　If　just　the　two　of　us　attack　him,　do　you　think　we　will　really　succeed？

LK:　If　you　are　not　confident　of　doing　it,　I　can　and　am.　If　I　am　not,　...　（pulls　out　his　revolver）　this　will　do.　What　is　Wang　Ta-ch'eng's　ability　really？

FD:　His　ability？　He　is　most　powerful　and　knows　how　to　use　18　kinds　of　different　weapons　I　am　told.

LK:　Heng！　Is　he　also　made　of　flesh　and　blood？

FD:　Probably　he　is.

LK:　If　he　is　really　made　of　flesh　and　blood,　he　is　not　equal　to　this.　（makes　a　gesture　of　shooting）　Can　he　jump　over　30　feet？

FD:　I　don't　know,　very　likely　he　can.

LK:　You　dog,　you　always　boast　of　others.　Even　if　we　believe　that　he　can　jump　30　feet,　yet　when　I　pull　the　trigger　I　can　kill　him　at　a　distance　of　30　or　even　a　hundred　feet.　Bang！　he　dies！

FD:　Well,　that's　a　good　argument,　but　he　won't　be　alone.

LK:　Oh,　even　if　he　has　8　or　10　fellows　with　him,　what　can　they　do？　（hides　himself　partly　behind　a　tree）　You　see,　I　will　hide　myself　thus　and　bang,bang,　bang.　I　will　kill　them　one　by　one.　（suddenly　stops　talking）　Listen！　（comes　out　from　behind　the　tree　and　cups　his　ear）　Listen！

FD:　What？（wants　to　run　into　the　forest）

LK:　（grasps　FD）　Where　are　you　going？　Go　to　that　mountain　and　see　where　they　are.

FD:　Oh,　heavens,　they　are　coming！

LK:　Go,　if　they　are　not　coming,　how　can　we　get　any　food.

FD:　（reluctant　to　go）　My　heavens,　my　heavens！

LK:　Be　quick！　Are　you　going　or　not？　if　not,　I　will　first　kill　you.　（forces　FD　at　the　point　of　his　revolver　to　go）

FD:　I　am　going,　I　am　going.　It　really　is　awful.　（he　is　scared　yet　wants　to　be　quick,　so　climbs　up　the　mountain）

LK：　（pushes　out　his　chest,　looks　at　his　revolver　says　to　himself）　Bang！　carload　of　silver！

FD:　（On　one　of　the　rocks,　puts　his　hand　over　his　eyes）　Little　K'an,　they're　coming！　Carts,　horses,　men,　a　huge　crowd.　（roll　off　the　rocks　and　comes　over　to　LK,　grasping　LK's　arm　and　says）　Little　K'an,　my　own　uncle,　there　are　too　many　for　us,　I　tell　you　you　cannot　do　it.

LK:　（releases　his　arm）　If　you　are　afraid,　get　out　of　the　way;　I　will　challenge　them　myself.　They　know　how　to　box,　I　have　my　revolver！

FD:　（very　seriously）　Do　you　want　to　give　up　your　life？　We　have　only　one　life　to　live.

LK：　（annoyed）　Don't　bother　me　any　more,　I　have　my　revolver.

FD:　You　are　not　a　match　to　Master　Wang　even　though　you　have　a　revolver.

LK:　（gritting　his　teeth）　Don't　bother　me,　if　you　don't　want　to　do　it,　get　out.

FD:　Don't　blame　me　if　you　are　killed.（pulls　out　his　stick　and　walks　towards　the　forest）

LK:　（stands　waiting）　I　will　do　it.

FD:　（coming　back）　No,　I　cannot　leave　you　alone.　If　we　die,　we　die　together.　（puts　up　his　stick　against　his　chest　as　if　it　were　a　gun,　straightens　himself　up　and　stands　beside　LK）　（they　hear　shouting,　the　bells　of　mules　and　horses　and　most　distinctly　shouts　of　Ah,　hai　of　the　men）

They　are　really　coming.　（moistens　his　lips　and　his　legs　are　shaking）

LK：　Steady,　steady;　if　you　are　acting　like　this,　it's　better　to　go　away　and　leave　me　alone.　（he　himself　is　also　a　bit　nervous;　holds　his　revolver　in　the　right　hand　and　rubs　his　left　hand　against　his　trousers）

FD：　（seeing　that　LK　is　also　nervous）　If　we　want　to　get　out　of　this　business,　it's　not　too　late　as　yet.

（bells　and　shouting　is　getting　nearer　and　nearer;　some　shouts　of　Ah,　hai）

LK：　His　mother's！

FD:　They　are　getting　very　near,　my　heavens！

LCY:　（on　his　head　a　black　silk　kerchief　to　cover　his　head;　black　silk　jacket　and　trousers　a　pair　of　black　boots　with　a　green　leather　piping　in　the　middle.　On　his　back　there　is　a　sword　with　red　silk　tassels.　He　was　shouting　"Ah,ah！”　As　soon　as　he　saw　LK　and　FD,　he　stops　suddenly　and　shouts　Yu,　yu,　a　sign　that　the　mules　and　horses　should　be　stopped）　（the　horses　and　carts　stopped　with　shouts　of　Yu,　yu,　heard　one　after　another）　Friends,　this　is　Master　Wang　Ta-ch'eng's　caravan.

FD:　（holding　LK's　arm）　He　calls　us　friends,　that's　good！

LK:　（pushes　FD　away,　and　steps　forward）　This　is　a　holdup.

LCY:　（smiled）　What,　friends！　Are　you　hard　up,　that's　easy,　Master　Wang　can　give　you　something.　（gives　a　signal　of　He-yoo,　indicating　danger）

LK:　（not　knowing　what　to　say）　This　is　a　holdup.

LCY:　（still　very　calm）　How　can　you,　friends！

LK:　（shows　his　revolver　to　Li）　I　have　this.

LCY:　（still　trying　to　talk,　to　give　time　to　people　to　come）　Revolver！　I　have　seen　it　before！　We　are　all　friends,　tell　me　how　much　do　you　want？　I　will　tell　my　master.

FD:　Little　K'an,　ask　for　some　money.

LK:　（not　heeding　FD　but　says　to　Li）　I　want　everything.　My　revolver　knows　no　pity.

TTS:　（similarly　dressed　as　LCY,　except　that　he　has　a　yellow　kerchief　on　his　head;　holds　a　long　spear　and　is　running　towards　Li）　What　is　all　about？

LCY:　A　holdup！

TTS:　（very　carelessly）　We　never　had　such　a　thing　before！

WTC:　（dressed　in　black　lacquered　silk　long　coat　with　a　huge　straw　hat　on　his　back.　Very　calm　but　very　careful.　Stops　Te-sheng　and　stands　in　front　of　his　two　pupils　and　addresses　the　bandits）　Friends,　what　is　all　about？

FD:　（to　LK）　This　is　probably　Master　Wang　himself.　（wants　to　run　away,　but　changes　his　mind,　turns　around　once　and　stands　in　the　same　place）

LK:　（to　WTC）　Are　you　Wang　Ta-ch'eng？

WTC:　Yes,　your　humble　friend,　Wang　Ta-ch'eng.　Are　you　hard　up？　That's　quite　easy　to　settle.

LK:　I　would　not　do　this,　if　I　were　not　hard　up.

WTC:　Oh,　we　can　easily　settle　this　since　you　know　that　I　am　Wang　Ta-ch'eng.　My　little　brother,　speak　up,　how　much　do　you　want？

LK:　I　want　everything.

WTC:　（begins　to　get　angry,　but　controls　himself）　You　are　joking,　aren't　you,　my　little　brother？　You　probably　know　that　my　life　is　tied　up　with　my　cargo.

TTS:　（again　wants　to　attack　the　bandits）Why　waste　your　words　with　these　fellows？

WTC:　（stops　TTS　again）　Little　brother,　perhaps　you　know,　WTC　never　pays　anything　to　make　a　way　for　himself,　so　don't　be　difficult.

LK:　No,　I　don't　want　you　to　pay　for　the　road,　I　want　all　the　cargo.

WTC:　（getting　angrier）　I　tell　you,　you　cannot　stand　my　fists.

FD:　（getting　sacred）　Little　K'an.

LK:　Fists！　I　have　this,　（shows　the　revolver）　stop　wasting　your　words.　If　you　want　your　life,　give　me　all　the　cargo.

WTC:　（still　trying　to　control　himself）　Well,　we　are　all　people　of　the　world.　When　we　first　meet,　we　are　strangers,　but　the　second　time　we　are　friends　and　everybody　wants　someone's　help.　This　time　you　help　me,　and　I　will　help　you　another　time.　Is　it　not　so,　friends？

LK:　If　you　waste　any　more　words,　I　will　shoot.

TTS:　I　cannot　stand　this　any　more.　I　will　attack　him.

WTC:　（stops　Te-sheng　again）　（to　LK）　Friend,　do　you　know,　I　have　been　wondering　about　many　many　years.　I　never　used　a　revolver　and　am　not　afraid　of　it　either.　Now,　won't　you　let　me　pass　by.　If　not,　I　will　show　no　more　courtesy.

LK:　You　are　not　afraid　of　a　revolver,　eh？　Now　I　will　let　you　see　something　new.　If　you　dare　make　a　step,　I　will　fire.

WTC:　（confused,　but　not　afraid）　Well,　（opens　up　his　coat）　aim　here.

FD:　Little　K'an,　Little　K'an,　don't　shoot.　（and　he　wants　to　run　away）

TTS:　（losing　all　his　patience）　Let　me　give　him　a　lesson.　（holding　his　spear,　runs　forward　towards　Little　K'an）

LK:　That's　a　good　fellow.　（fires,　the　first　bullet　did　not　hit　anybody,　fires　again　and　hits　TTS's　arm）

TTS:　Ah！　（stumbles　and　falls　down）

SML:　（immediately　after　the　firing,　rushes　forward　and　fires　at　Little　K'an　and　hits　his　wrist）

LK:　Ah！　（and　tries　to　fire　again）

WTC:　（jumps　over　and　grabs　LK's　revolver）　You　good　for　nothing！　（pushes　LK　and　LK　falls　on　the　ground）

SML:　（stands　still　and　says　to　LCY）　Chan-yuan,　follow　him.　（Fourth　Dog　is　running　away）

LCY:　He　cannot　escape.　（and　chases　FD）

SML:　（turns　his　head）　You,　（to　the　caravan）　come　here.　Carry　these　two　people　and　treat　their　wounds.　（To　WTC）　Have　we　any　medicine？

WTC:　（looking　at　the　revolver　and　lost　in　thought）　Ah？

SML:　Is　there　any　medicine？

WTC:　Yes.　（LCY　captured　FD　and　they　are　coming　back　together）　（to　LCY）　Chan-yuan,　don't　beat　him.　Take　him　to　the　caravan　and　watch　him.　（the　hired　hands　come　to　the　stage,　carry　away　LK　and　TTS）　（to　the　crowd）　Something　for　their　wounds,　（takes　Mr.　Sung's　arm）　Mr.　Sung,　do　you　also　have　this？　（shows　the　revolver）

SML:　（nodding）　Because　you　have　not　got　one.

WTC:　（releases　his　hand　from　Mr.　Sung）　Mr.　Sung,　I　thank　you,　I　thank　you,　but,　（his　expression　is　ashamed　and　angry）　but　...　Mr.　Sung,　but　I,　Wang　Ta-ch'eng,　have　lost　face.　I　really　did　not　know　what　to　do.　I　was　held　up　by　these　two　hoodlums　and　my　life　was　saved　by　you,　a　literary　man.　My　name,　my　skill　in　boxing,　my　...　（chokes）

SML:　Master　Wang,　the　world　has　changed,　fists　are　not　as　efficient　as　revolvers.　It　really　is　not　your　fault.

WTC:　I　really　don't　believe　it　....　I　don't　believe　it　....

SML:　You　don't　believe　what？

WTC:　This　（holding　the　revolver）　I　don't　believe.　（he　fired　furiously　three　times,　aiming　at　the　trees;　then　looks　at　the　bullet　holes,　says）　Even　trees,　even　trees　...　（begins　to　tremble）　Ah！

SML:　Yes,　even　a　sheet　of　iron　can　be　pierced　with　the　bullets.

WTC:　（as　though　talking　to　himself）　It　can　even　penetrate　a　sheet　of　iron　....　（becomes　downhearted）　Now,　Mr.　Sung,　boxing　is　over.　I　am　over　too.　Think　of　it,　suppose　a　daredevil　would　hid　behind　a　tree,　and　fire,　I　...　I　...

SML:　Boxing　is　still　useful　and　you　are　useful　too.

WTC:　I　am　still　useful？　But　you　saved　my　life,　ouch　...

SML:　It　would　be　still　more　useful　if　you　could　combine　your　boxing　with　this　revolver.

WTC:　（as　if　not　understanding　what　Sung　has　just　said,　thoughts　occupied　with　other　ideas）　Now,　let　me　ask　you,　why　did　you　want　to　accompany　me？　Did　you　come　to　see　me　being　disgraced？

SML:　（smiled）　I　come　here　to　see　your　disgrace？　Master　Wang,　what　are　you　saying？　I　came　because　I　want　to　get　to　know　you　better,　I　want　to　see　more　people　like　you.

WTC:　Why？

SML:　You　are　useful.

WTC:　Useful？　I　am　no　match　to　this.　（points　the　revolver）

SML:　I　cannot　explain　everything　in　a　few　words.　Anyhow,　you　know　how　to　box,　you　have　courage,　you　are　strong,　an　upright　character,　therefore　I　say,　you　are　useful.

WTC:　Mr.　Sung,　I　don't　understand　you.　Never　mind　...　You　are　intelligent.　I　admire　you.

SML:　I　admire　you　too.　Now　I　think　we　must　go　on　with　our　trip.

WTC:　Yes,（in　one　jump　gets　near　the　rocks　and　shouts）　put　Te-sheng　on　one　of　these　carts,　we　are　going！　Chan-yuan,　bring　these　two　fellows　to　me　（jumps　back　where　Sung　is　standing）　Mr.　Sung,　how　strong　these　two　fellows　are,　it　would　be　wonderful　if　they　had　the　right　training.

SML:　Oh　those　two　are　good　for　nothing,　they　are　not　worth　your　time.

LCY:　（pushes　the　two　hoodlums,　Little　K'an's　wrist　is　bandaged　and　some　drop　seeps　through　the　bandage）　Master,　shall　we　let　them　go？

SML:　Yes,　Master　Wang,　do　you　let　them　be　alive？

WTC:　（Looks　at　the　two　and　seems　to　take　a　liking　to　them）

You　...

FD:　Master　Wang,　have　pity,　I　have　a　mother　about　sixty.

LK:　（still　stubborn）　Heng！

WTC:　I　will　forgive　you　two.

FD:　It　is　really　very　good　of　you,　Master　Wang.

SML:　Do　you　let　them　go　free？

WTC:　Mr.　Sung,　this　is　the　ethics　of　our　profession.　（takes　out　a　few　pieces　of　silver　from　his　pocket　and　gives　them　to　Fourth　Dog）　Take　this,　it　for　you　both.　Don't　do　this　trick　again.

FD:　Yes　Master.　（to　Little　K'an）　Let's　go.

LK:　（still　bad　tempered）　What　about　my　revolver？

WTC:　Oh,　yes,　your　revolver,　I　don't　like　this　kind　of　toys.

SML:　（seeing　that　Master　Wang　wanted　to　return　the　revolver　to　LK,　stops　him）　No,　don't　give　it　back　to　him,　you　keep　it.

WTC:　I　keep　it？

SML:　Keep　it！

WTC:　I　guess　I　should　own　a　revolver　for　my　business　in　future.

SML:　What　a　great　age,　what　a　weapon！

LCY:　（pushes　Little　K'an）　Get　out.　（Little　K'an　stumbles　for　a　few　steps,　stands　up）

LK:　You　wait　and　see　...　（goes　away）

WTC:　（still　looking　at　the　revolver）　（to　himself）　What　a　great　age,　what　a　weapon！

（the　shouting,　the　bells,　the　wheels　of　the　carts　start　again）

LCY:　Ah,　hai　...　ah,　hai　...

（Curtain）





