2


The　city　of　Chungking　in　Szechwan　Province　is　built　on　a　hill,　at　the　foot　of　which　meet　the　two　mighty　rivers　Kialing　and　Yangtze.　Their　junction　resembles　a　miniature　sea.　In　the　center　where　the　river　currents　collide,　there　is　a　ridge　of　water　which　shines　radiantly　in　the　sun,　marking　the　boundaries　of　the　two　rivers　and　warning　the　passing　ships　of　danger.

Along　the　lines　of　the　riverbank,　big　grayish_black　wooden　boats　wallowed　at　anchor.　Little　red　flags　fluttered　from　their　tall　masts.　Men　with　bare　backs　and　bare　feet　and　white　cloths　wrapped　round　their　foreheads　were　carrying　cargoes　of　all　sizes　and　descriptions　up　and　down　the　gangplanks.

Ships,　boats,　ferries,　and　pitifully　small　wooden　canoes　were　moving　on　the　river.　The　large　steamers　kept　sounding　their　whistles.　The　small　wooden　boats　rolled　up　and　down　in　the　waves　like　little　black　leaves.　Boats　were　everywhere.　Some　were　moving,　some　not,　some　long,　some　short,　some　old_fashioned　and　some　modern,　some　cruising　straight　ahead　and　some　veering　this　way　and　that.　They　made　the　miniature　sea　where　the　two　rivers　merged　look　narrow,overcrowded,　noisy,　and　confused.

The　bank　was　lined　with　reed　and　bamboo　tents　where　the　refugees　hurried　to　buy　food.　There　were　huge　pots　of　steaming　rice　and　chunks　of　bright　red　meat,　rolls　of　thick　sausages　and　piles　of　green　tangerines.　The　booths　were　surrounded　by　the　crowds　who　shopped　and　gossiped,　and　admired　the　big　fat　white　pigs　and　the　little　maroon_colored　Szechwan　ponies　no　larger　than　donkeys.

The　weather　was　unbearably　hot,　without　the　slightest　breeze.　This　miniature　sea　was　like　a　steaming　oven　—　so　hot　that　everyone　perspired　and　gasped　for　breath,　and　was　short　of　temper.　Sailors　and　passengers,　porters　and　travelers,　buyers　and　sellers　alike,　were　quarrelsome.

The　blazing　sunlight,　reflected　in　the　water,　blinded　the　eyes.　The　yellow　sand　and　the　huge　bare　rocks　shimmered　in　the　light.　The　view　made　one　feel　parched.　The　city,　many　feet　above　the　river,　was　also　sweltering　under　a　cloud　of　grayish_white　mist.　It　was　all　water　down　below　and　all　rocks　high　above.　Between　the　water　and　the　hill　were　hundreds　of　steps　—　blinding　streaks　of　reflected　light.　The　sea　was　a　steaming　oven,　the　city　on　the　hill　a　vast　kiln.

Pao　Ching　was　clasping　his　precious　three_stringed　instrument　in　his　arms　as　though　he　were　holding　a　baby.　Phoenix　Girl　had　the　drum　in　her　hands.　She　held　it　as　carefully　and　respectfully　as　though　she　were　holding　the　image　of　Buddha.　Pao　Ching　was　in　no　hurry　to　leave　the　boat.　He　did　not　try　to　fight　his　way　through　the　crowd.　Years　of　traveling　had　made　him　used　to　this　kind　of　thing.　He　found　himself　an　out_of_the_way　place　where　he　with　his　three_stringed　instrument　could　wait　at　leisure　for　the　others　to　go　first.　As　to　his　fellow　passengers,　including　the　refugee　children,　he　had　already　said　polite　goodbyes　hours　ago.

From　the　look　of　the　panicky　passengers,　one　would　think　the　boat　had　caught　fire　instead　of　having　anchored.　Every　passenger　was　trying　to　be　the　first　to　go　down　the　gangplank.　They　were　losing　their　tempers,　shouting　and　cursing.　As　they　fought,　some　women　lost　their　babies　in　the　river,　others　their　high_heeled　shoes;　and　they　all　wobbled　as　if　they　were　dancing　the　hopscotch.　Those　who　had　forgotten　to　lock　their　suitcases　arrived　on　the　bank　to　find　only　an　empty　case,　the　contents　all　down　the　river.　The　pickpockets　were　busy,　too,　and　petty　thieves　made　off　with　umbrellas;　nasty_minded　men　ran　lustful　fingers　over　the　soft　places　on　women's　bodies.

Pao　Ching　was　afraid　that　Lotus　Charm　might　get　hurt　in　the　crowd.　He　kept　warning　her,　“My　little　Lotus　Charm,　don't　hurry.　Don't　hurry."

Though　Lotus　Charm　was　not　yet　mature,　she　attracted　attention　everywhere.　Perhaps　it　was　because　she　belonged　to　the　lowly　drum_singing　profession,　which　meant　that　most　people　felt　they　could　take　advantage　of　her.　Or　perhaps　her　face　had　the　quality　of　virgin　radiance,　which　fitted　the　artless　but　attractive　manner　of　her　conversation　and　her　behavior.

She　had　a　small　round　face,　delicately　and　pleasantly　full.　Whether　she　wore　make_up　or　not,　her　face　always　had　a　quality　of　innocent　radiance.　Her　eyes　were　very　black　and　wondrously　lustrous.　She　was　not　exactly　pretty,　but　she　had　an　underscri_bable　allure　of　innocence　which　caught　the　attention　of　all　who　saw　her.　Her　nose　was　small　and　tiptilted.　Her　nostrils　turned　slightly　upward,　which　robbed　the　lower　part　of　her　face　of　some　of　its　charm　and　made　her　look　like　a　mischievous　little　child.　When　she　tilted　her　small　chin　and　nose　upward,　she　looked　as　if　there　was　nothing　in　the　world　which　mattered.　Her　lips　were　exceptionally　thin.　Only　when　she　put　on　lipstick　did　they　stand　out.　Her　teeth　were　very　white　but　not　even.That,somehow,　added　something　to　her　personality.

Her　black　glossy　hair　was　plentiful.　She　usually　wore　it　braided　in　two　little　pigtails.　Sometimes　the　pigtails　hung　in　front　of　her　shoulders,　sometimes　at　the　back,　and　almost　always　she　tied　them　with　bright_colored　ribbons.

Her　body　was　not　yet　fully　developed.　She　wore　black_and_white　embroidered　satin　slippers　which　made　her　look　shorter　and　tinier　still.　Her　step　was　light.　If　she　looked　a　little　reckless,　it　might　be　because　of　her　light_stepping　feet.　Her　face,　her　two　little　pigtails,[JP2]　and　her　figure　gave　her　the　appearance　of　a　normal　fourteen-[JP]year-old　girl.　Only　when　she　walked　with　those　light　dancing　steps　would　one　know　she　was　a　public　entertainer.　Now,　although　she　was　wearing　elaborate　embroidered　satin　slippers,　over　her　lithe　young　body　she　had　only　a　navy　blue　cotton　gown.

Because　of　the　intense　heat,　she　had　her　braids　hanging　over　her　shoulders　and　they　were　without　ribbons.　Her　make_up　was　already　washed　away　by　perspiration,　revealing　her　vivid　ivory　skin.　Her　cheeks　were　flushed　with　the　heat.　This　made　her　look　prettier　than　with　her　makeup　on.

Her　eager　black　eyes　had　taken　in　everything　along　the　bank　—　the　green　tangerines,　the　white　rice,　the　little　maroon　ponies,　and　the　reed　and　bamboo　booths.　To　her,　they　were　all　new　and　interesting　and　exciting.　She　wanted　to　jump　down　to　the　river　bank　right　away,　to　buy　some　of　the　green　tangerines　and　ride　on　the　odd_colored　ponies.　Chungking　was　wonderful,　she　thought.　Who　would　have　guessed　that　horses　here　could　be　smaller　than　donkeys　and　that　tangerines　were　sold　green　before　they　were　ripe.　And　already　families　were　settling　into　the　booths.　A　plump　naked　little　baby　caught　her　eye.　She　forgot　the　heat,　forgot　her　little　grievances.　How　she　wished　she　were　ashore　instead　of　being　still　on　the　boat.

But　she　knew　her　father　was　watching　her.　However　impatient　she　was,　she　dared　not　go　down　alone.　She　was　just　a　little　girl　and,　in　addition,　only　a　drum　singer.　She　needed　her　father　to　protect　her.　So　she　stood　still,　looking　out　across　the　riverbank　at　the　green　tangerines　and　the　fat　white　pigs.

Useless　Fang　was　sitting　up　—　not　that　he　wanted　to,　but　if　he　did　not,　he　would　risk　having　his　face　trampled　by　passengers　as　they　fought　their　way　through.　He　had　not　stopped　groaning.　The　confusion　of　the　people　rushing　by　made　him　dizzy,　he　said.

In　appearance,　he　looked　very　much　like　his　brother,　except　he　was　taller　and　thinner.　But　because　he　was　thin,　his　eyes　and　nose　appeared　larger　than　they　actually　were.　He　wore　his　long　hair　combed　back,　smooth　and　long　like　an　artist　just　returned　from　Paris.

He　too　could　sing　folk　songs　to　the　accompaniment　of　the　drum　and　fiddle,　and　could　do　it　even　better　than　his　brother.　But　he　scorned　the　drum_singing　profession　because　it　was　lowly.　He　could　play　the　three_stringed　instrument　too.　But　he　would　not　accompany　his　brother　and　niece,because　being　an　accompanist　would　be　lowlier　still.　So　he　did　nothing　and　lived　on　his　brother,　because,　according　to　his　own　reasoning,　doing　that　did　not　make　him　a　lowly　person.　He　was　an　intelligent　man.　If　he　had　liked,　he　could　have　become　a　distinguished　singer.　But　he　did　not　want　to　make　the　effort.　He　always　scorned　money.　To　trade　song　and　music　for　money！　How　degrading！

Ethically　speaking,　Pao　Ching　could　not　escape　supporting　Useless　Fang.　They　were　born　of　the　same　parents,　so　he　had　to　accept　the　responsibility.　But　Useless　Fang　did　serve　some　purpose　in　the　family:　he　was　the　only　one　who　could　manage　Pao　Ching's　wife.　Her　temper　came　and　went　like　a　summer　storm.　When　Pao　Ching　found　it　difficult　to　cope　with　her,　only　his　brother　could　manage.　Whenever　she　lost　her　temper,　Useless　Fang　would　lose　his　too.　If　two　people　lose　their　tempers　at　the　same　time,　one　of　them　has　to　be　the　first　to　give　in.　If　she　began　to　smile,　Useless　Fang　would　smile　also.　When　both　of　them　were　smiling,　there　was　peace　in　the　family.　Useless　Fang　always　kept　his　sister_in_law　company,　playing　cards　and　drinking　with　her.

Pao　Ching　had　his　own　reasons　to　feel　protective　toward　Lotus　Charm.　She　was　his　main　source　of　income,　and,　in　all　conscience,　he　could　not　but　feel　grateful　to　her.　She　had　been　earning　money　for　him　since　she　was　eleven　years　old,　when　she　stepped　on　the　stage　to　give　her　first　performance.　But　he　was　always　afraid　that　she　might　learn　evil　ways　from　her　fellow　girl　singers.　The　older　she　grew,　the　greater　the　danger　became,　he　felt,　and　the　more　anxious　he　was　of　her.　When　she　sang　in　the　amusement　centers,　she　came　into　contact　with　girl　singers　who　sold　more　than　their　talents.　His　duty　was　to　protect　and　discipline　her,　but　he　knew　he　must　not　spoil　her.　Because　of　this,　love　and　anxiety　were　constantly　at　war　in　his　heart;　he　never　knew　for　sure　what　he　should　do　for　the　best.

Useless　Fang's　attitude　towards　Lotus　Charm　was　very　different.　He　felt　no　gratitude　to　her　because　she　earned　the　money　he　spent.　And　he　did　not　worry　that　she　might　become　a　lost　woman　through　her　lowly　profession.　He　just　loved　her　as　if　she　were　his　real　niece.He　would　willingly　have　fought　his　brother　and　sister_in_law　if　they　did　not　give　Lotus　Charm　everything　she　wanted.　But　he　had　many　times　angered　Lotus　Charm　himself.　Often　when　he　was　out　of　money,　he　would　steal　one　of　her　rings　or　a　pair　of　expensive　high_heeled　shoes　to　sell.　If　Lotus　Charm　did　not　get　angry,　he　became　an　even　closer　and　more　loyal　friend.　If　she　lost　her　temper,　he　would　get　red　in　the　face,　and　upbraid　her.　And　after　that,　he　would　not　speak　to　her　till　she　apologized.

Shortly　before　they　docked,　Mrs.Fang　had　fallen　asleep.　She　was　always　like　that.　Before　anything　happened,　she　would　be　full　of　ideas　and　opinions.　But　when　the　time　came,　she　had　usually　drunk　so　much　that　she　was　in　deep　sleep.　When　she　woke　up,　she　would　always　be　quiet　and　peaceful　if　matters　had　been　satisfactorily　arranged.　If　not,　she　would　shout　and　claim　furiously　that　her　way　was　right.

Mrs.Fang's　father　had　also　been　a　professional　drum　singer.　According　to　the　custom　of　the　drum_singing　people,　however,　parents　never　would　let　their　own　daughters　learn　the　trade,　preferring　to　raise　them　as　respectable　girls　so　they　could　marry　respectable　husbands.　But　they　would　buy　a　little　girl　not　their　own　flesh_and_blood,　teach　her　to　sing,　and　let　her　make　money　for　them.

Even　so,　Mrs.Fang　herself　had　not　been　raised　respectably.　Before　she　was　married,　she　had　followed　the　profession　that　supported　many　of　the　drum_singing　girls.

When　she　was　young,　she　had　been　passably　good_looking.And　now　at　middle　age,　when　she　was　not　drunk,　she　was　still　attractive.　The　skin　on　her　long　oval　face　was　soft　and　fair.　But　when　she　was　drunk,　her　face　was　covered　with　little　red　spots　that　made　her　look　dissolute.　He　eyes　were　attractive,　and　she　always　combed　her　hair　very　casually　into　a　bun　at　the　back　of　her　neck.　The　bun　made　her　look　coquettish　sometimes　and　elegant　at　others.　She　was　not　tall,　and　recently　she　had　begun　to　stoop.　At　times　she　was　dressed　carefully,　and　her　face　made　up,　but　often　she　was　unkempt.　Everything　about　her　was　like　her　temper,　unpredictable　and　changeable.

Pao　Ching　had　not　started　life　as　a　drum　singer.　He　had　learned　a　trade,　but　he　loved　to　sing　so　he　decided　to　become　a　professional.　That　was　how　he　met　his　wife.　He　wanted　to　learn　all　he　could　from　her　singing　father,　and　at　the　same　time,　was　very　much　in　love　with　her　beauty　and　romantic　manner.　When　he　married　her,　he　finally　became　a　professional　singer.

Mrs.Fang　felt　that　because　Lotus　Charm　was　a　drum　singer,　she　could　never　become　a　good　woman.　This,　Mrs.Fang　believed,　because　of　her　own　early　association　with　the　girl　singers.　As　Lotus　Charm　grew　prettier,　Mrs.Fang　became　more　and　more　jealous.　Sometimes　when　she　was　drunk,　she　accused　her　husband　of　having　dishonorable　intentions　toward　the　girl.　Because　she　herself　came　from　a　drum_singing　family,　Mrs.　Fang　thought　nothing　of　buying　and　selling　girls　to　suit　her　ends.　She　had　made　up　her　mind　to　sell　Lotus　Charm　again,　this　time　as　a　concubine　to　a　rich　man,　before　Lotus　Charm　got　too　wise.　Mrs.Fang　knew　that　by　doing　this,　she　could　turn　a　pretty　penny　for　herself.　With　part　of　the　money,　she　would　buy　another　seven　or　eight_year_old　girl,　train　her　to　sing,　and　then　sell　her　when　she　became　of　age.　It　was　good　business.　She　was　not　a　heartless　person,　just　practical.　In　her　own　day,　she　had　seen　so　many　little　girls　bought　and　sold;　it　seemed　the　natural　thing　to　do.　Besides,　if　she　was　bought　by　a　rich　man,　Lotus　Charm　herself　would　always　have　plenty　to　eat　and　drink,　and　not　be　lacking　in　diamonds　and　jewels.　So　for　Lotus　Charm's　good　too,　it　might　not　be　at　all　a　bad　idea　to　sell　her.

Pao　Ching　was　opposed　to　his　wife's　idea.　He　did　not　come　from　a　drum_singing　family.　He　could　not　buy　and　sell　human　beings　without　feeling　disgust.　It　was　true　he　had　bought　Lotus　Charm.　But　he　had　done　so　because　he　had　pity　on　the　poor　little　girl.　He　wanted　to　feed　her　and　bring　her　up　properly.　At　first,　he　had　no　intention　of　turning　her　into　a　professional　drum　singer.　Only　because　she　was　so　bright,　and　liked　so　much　to　sing,　did　he　teach　her　a　song　or　two.　He　felt　that　even　if　it　was　wrong　for　him　to　have　bought　the　girl,　it　would　be　worse　still　to　sell　her.　He　hoped　she　would　help　him　several　more　years　and　then,　when　she　was　old　enough,　she　would　marry　a　man　of　good　standing　and　settle　down.　Then,　and　only　then,　would　he　have　no　weight　on　his　conscience.

He　dared　not　quarrel　openly　with　his　wife　over　the　matter.　She　never　discussed　Lotus　Charm's　future　with　him　either.　But　when　she　was　drunk,　she　would　scream　at　him,　“Go　ahead　and　keep　her　if　you　like.　You　can　keep　her.　Sooner　or　later,　she'll　run　away　with　some　no_good　man.　Then　you'll　be　happy."

This　kind　of　talk　increased　Pao　Ching's　fear　and　made　him　want　to　protect　Lotus　Charm　all　the　more.　But　his　wife's　tongue　got　sharper　as　time　went　on.

The　ship　was　almost　empty.　Lotus　Charm　wanted　to　go　ashore　but　dared　not　go　alone.　She　was　so　restless　that　she　swung　her　pigtails　to　the　front　of　her　shoulders　one　minute　and　to　the　back　another.

Lotus　Charm　did　not　dare　to　wake　her　mother.　Neither　did　Pao　Ching　or　Phoenix　Girl.　Only　Useless　Fang　could　do　that.　But　he　was　waiting　for　someone　to　ask　him,　so　as　to　show　his　importance.

“Please　wake　her　up,"　Pao　Ching　said.

Useless　Fang　stopped　groaning.　He　rolled　up　his　sleeves　pompously　and　woke　her.

Mrs.Fang　opened　her　eyes.　She　hiccuped　twice.　Then,　seeing　the　city　on　the　hill,　she　asked,　“Where　are　we？"

“Chungking,"　said　Useless　Fang,　airing　his　importance.

“Is　that　it？"　Mrs.Fang　pointed　an　unsteady　finger　at　the　hill.　“I　won't　go　there！　I　want　to　go　home."　She　grabbed　her　little　parcel,　looking　as　if　she　could　get　home　in　one　hop.

They　knew　that　if　they　argued　with　her,　she　would　jump　into　the　water　and　make　such　a　fuss　that　it　might　be　hours　before　they　could　get　ashore.

Pao　Ching　rolled　his　eyeballs.　He　never　admitted　he　was　afraid　of　his　wife.　He　remembered　the　time　when　he　was　courting　her　and　the　first　two　years　after　they　were　married.　He　remembered　how　hard　he　had　tried　to　please　her　and　how　he　pampered　her　to　the　point　of　making　himself　ridiculous.　He　rolled　his　eyes　as　he　thought.　How　could　he　avoid　a　direct　clash　with　his　wife,　and　yet　persuade　her　to　go　ashore.　He　spoke　to　Phoenix　Girl　and　to　Lotus　Charm　instead.　“Do　you　two　want　to　walk,　or　to　ride　in　the　litter？"

Lotus　Charm　answered　in　her　young　tender　voice,　“I　want　to　ride　on　that　maroon　pony.　It'll　be　fun."

Mrs.Fang　immediately　forgot　the　parcel　she　was　planning　to　take　home.　She　turned　to　look　at　Lotus　Charm　and　screamed,　“You　are　not　to　do　any　such　thing！　To　ride　on　that　pony！　No　one　is　going　to　ride　on　that　pony！"

“All　right,　all　right,"　Pao　Ching　said,　leaping　at　the　opportunity.　He　led　the　way,　with　the　fiddle　still　in　his　arms.　“We'll　take　the　litters.　Come　now.　We'll　take　the　litters."

They　all　followed　him　down　the　gangplank.　Mrs.Fang　still　insisted　that　she　wanted　to　go　home,　but　she　walked　behind　them.　She　knew　very　well　that　if　she　was　left　alone,　she　would　never　get　home　by　herself.　And　besides,　she　knew　nothing　about　the　city　of　Chungking　either.

The　whole　family,　carrying　the　fiddle,　the　drum,　and　parcels　large　and　small,　climbed　into　the　separate　litters.　The　porters,　who　took　their　heavy　luggage,　walked　ahead.

Step　by　step,　slowly　and　wearily,　the　coolies　carried　the　litters　up　the　steep　incline　to　the　city.　Those　in　the　litters　sat　quietly,　lifting　their　heads　or　straightening　their　backs　occasionally　but　otherwise　not　moving.　With　the　dangerous　mountain　steps　ahead　of　her,　even　Mrs.Fang　was　quiet　and　still.　She　was　scared　she　might　fall　out　of　her　seat　if　she　moved.

Only　Lotus　Charm　was　happy.　She　called　out　to　her　sister　Phoenix　Girl,　“Look！　This　is　like　going　up　to　Heaven."

Phoenix　Girl　seldom　spoke.　This　time　she　answered,　“Careful,　younger　sister.　I　remember　the　higher　you　climb,　the　harder　you　fall！"





