7


Three　vacant　rooms　in　the　theater　were　rented　as　a　meeting　place　to　a　group　that　twice　a　week　sang　Peiping　opera.　They　had　learned　a　few　arias　while　living　in　Peiping　and　back　in　Chungking　had　formed　a　music　club.　Apart　from　the　few　hours　the　club　of　opera　fans　met,　the　rooms　were　always　empty.

The　music　lovers　did　not　know　many　operas.　Even　if　all　of　them　were　together　they　could　not　sing　a　complete　opera.　After　a　few　meetings,　they　lost　their　enthusiasm　for　Peiping　opera,　and　many　of　them　didn't　care　to　sing　any　more.　If　they　turned　up　at　the　club　rooms　at　all,　they　played　mahjong.　But　the　music　club　paid　its　rent　every　month,　and　officially　occupied　the　three　rooms　to　demonstrate　that　they　were　lovers　of　Peiping　opera.

Pao　Ching　had　to　find　a　place　to　live.　He　could　not　stay　on　in　that　little　hotel.　But　Chungking　was　getting　more　and　more　crowded　every　day.　Shipload　after　shipload　of　people　arrived　every　twenty_four　hours,　and　it　was　almost　impossible　to　find　a　place　to　live.　There　were　those　three　vacant　rooms　over　the　theater.　What　could　be　better？　He　had　to　have　them.　But　how　about　the　Peiping　opera　lovers？

He　went　to　see　the　club　president.　With　subtle　tact　he　made　no　mention　of　the　empty　rooms.　Instead　he　talked　about　the　ancient　glories　of　Peiping　opera　and　lauded　the　club　president's　accomplishments　in　that　field.　Had　he　not　heard　his　name　and　talent　praised　when　he　himself　was　in　Peiping,　in　Shanghai,　in　Nanking？　All　over　China　in　fact.　And　had　not　the　Nanking　newspaper　given　him　glowing　reviews　when　he　had　made　a　guest　appearance　in　an　opera　there？　（The　truth　was　that　the　opera　club　president　had　never　made　any　guest　appearance　anywhere.　But　he　did　not　want　to　correct　Pao　Ching.）　From　Peiping　opera　the　subject　turned　to　drum　singing.　Pao　Ching　edged　in　his　point　so　gradually　and　with　such　charm　that　the　club　president　was　soon　agreeing　that　drum　singing　was　second　only　to　Peiping　opera,　although　he　had　never　heard　any　drum　singing　in　his　life.　But　Pao　Ching　was　a　cultured　man　from　the　cultured　city　of　Peiping,　and　so　he　would　welcome　him　as　a　friend.　How　great　was　the　bond　between　real　music　lovers！　Half　an　hour　later　the　music　club　for　lovers　of　Peiping　opera　was　officially　without　its　club　rooms.　An　hour　later　Pao　Ching　and　his　family　had　moved　in　—　over　the　theater.

Lotus　Charm　and　Phoenix　Girl　shared　one　room,　and　Pao　Ching　and　his　wife　the　other.　The　center　room　they　used　as　a　living　room.　Useless　Fang　objected　to　making　up　his　bed　every　night　in　the　living　room.　He　would　stay　and　suffer　in　the　little　hotel.　And　he　suffered　in　comfort,　with　a　room　all　to　himself,　which　gave　him　delightful　privacy.

Pao　Ching　liked　the　new　quarters.　The　rent　was　low　and　the　rooms　were　right　above　the　theater.　What　more　could　he　ask！　No　more　exertion　of　going　to　and　from　work　every　day.　And　he　would　now　have　time　to　manage　the　home　himself.

But　his　content　was　short_lived.　He　should　have　known　he　could　always　count　on　the　Tangs.　Since　the　Tangs　had　failed　to　get　a　raise　for　Jeweled　Lute,　they　had　to　think　up　other　ways　of　making　trouble　for　Pao　Ching.　They　had　their　problems　—　the　greatest　of　all,　to　make　a　living.　They　couldn't　tell　Jeweled　Lute　to　quit　Pao　Ching's　company,　or　they　would　be　without　money.　But　on　general　good　principle　they　had　to　annoy　Pao　Ching.　Fat　Mrs.Tang　was　mistress　of　the　art　of　irritating.　Her　husband　had　learned　from　her,　and　she　saw　to　it　that　he　did　an　efficient　job.

One　day　she　sent　him　to　Pao　Ching　to　ask　for　Jeweled　Lute's　salary　in　advance.　The　child　had　to　have　clothes;　and　they　hardly　had　enough　to　eat.　Then　Jeweled　Lute　was　sick,　too　sick　to　appear,　so　she　must　take　a　day　off.

Pao　Ching　endured　all　this　with　resignation.　It　was　silly　to　give　in　to　these　leeches,　he　knew,　but　he　was　sorry　for　them,　because　they　had　not　learned　how　to　live　at　peace　with　the　world.　They　were　not　even　discouraged　when　he　refused　to　advance　Jeweled　Lute's　carfare.

The　day　that　the　Fang　family　moved　in　over　the　theater　brought　a　crisis.　Fourth　Master　Tang,　looking　more　like　a　frustrated　weasel　than　ever,　arrived　at　the　theater　soon　after　dawn.　His　eyes　were　heavy　with　reproach,　and　his　mouth　was　downturned　with　frustration.

He　indicated　to　Pao　Ching　very　plainly　that　the　whole　Tang　family　thought　he　was　a　monster　for　finding　his　family　a　place　to　live,　and　neglecting　to　do　the　same　for　his　dearest　and　most　faithful　friends　—　the　Tangs.　“My　friend,"　he　said　with　a　hint　of　harshness,　“you　must　do　something　for　us.　You　have　influence.　You　must　use　it　to　find　us　a　place　to　live.　After　all,　you　found　luxurious　quarters　for　yourself."

So　Pao　Ching　promised.　He　was　always　promising,　and　he　didn't　like　to.　It　hurt　him　to　have　to　promise,　when　he　did　not　intend　to　do　anything.　But　the　Tangs　forced　this　on　him　with　their　constant　complaints,　and　he　let　Fourth　Master　Tang　gabble　on.　He　listened　quietly,　nodding　his　head　and　smiling.

Mrs.Tang,　too,　came　to　life　socially.　Every　day　she　would　waddle　up　to　the　apartment　over　the　theater　to　see　her　dear　friend　Mrs.　Fang　—　Pao　Ching's　wife.　Her　visits　were　always　the　same.　She　would　enter　the　living　room　with　a　broad,　friendly　smile　on　her　face.　“So　here　I　am,"　she　would　puff.　“I've　walked　all　this　way　specially　to　see　you.　After　all,　I　said　to　myself,　we　are　strangers　in　this　wretched　town,　and　so　we　should　stick　together.　I　feel　absolutely　lost　if　I　don't　see　my　only　friends　every　day.　The　thought　of　not　seeing　you　makes　me　thoroughly　unhappy."

Then　after　she　had　wedged　her　vast　behind　into　the　largest　chair,　she　would　begin　her　tirade.　“Has　that　clever　husband　of　yours　found　us　a　place　to　live？"　she　would　ask　Mrs.　Tang.　“Has　he？　Now　you　must　hurry　him　up.　We　are　so　unfortunate　having　to　live　in　a　hotel,　and　the　cost　is　terrific.　We　simply　cannot　get　along."

And　there　she　would　sit　for　hours,　drinking　all　the　tea,　eating　everything　she　could　lay　her　hands　on.

There　were　other　visitors　too.　The　local　police　chief,　the　detectives,　the　gangsters,　and　a　few　rich　young　men.　They　came　to　look　at　Louts　Charm,　and　often　stayed　longer　than　Mrs.　Tang.　And　of　course　Pao　Ching　had　to　entertain　them.　Tea　and　melon　seeds,　and　conversation.

Often　they　came　before　Lotus　Charm　was　up.　They　would　sit　in　the　living　room,　their　eyes　on　the　cotton　print　curtain　in　the　doorway　to　Lotus　Charm's　bedroom.　Pao　Ching　knew　what　they　came　for,　but　he　dared　not　turn　them　out.　If　he　did,　a　gang　of　them　might　show　up　at　the　theater　one　night　and　start　trouble.　A　few　teacups　smashed,　a　shot　or　two　fired　at　an　electric　light　bulb,　and　there　it　was.　One　riot,　and　his　business　would　be　ruined.

Worst　of　all,　among　the　young　men　who　called　early　was　the　local　sheriff　—　a　handsome　young　man　with　a　roguish　smile,　and　a　way　with　women.　He　just　came　and　sat,　a　toothpick　in　his　teeth,　his　eyes　always　on　the　door.　One　day　one　young　man　more　daring　than　the　others　got　up,　and　walked　right　into　the　room　where　Lotus　Charm　was　asleep.　The　others　followed.

Pao　Ching　found　them　all　gaping　at　his　daughter,　and　he　did　a　lot　of　talking.　Lotus　Charm　was　tired.　She　needed　a　great　deal　of　rest　for　her　singing.　Reluctantly　they　moved　back　into　the　next　room,　and　sat　waiting.　Pao　Ching　was　burning　inside　with　anger.　But　he　held　his　temper　in　check　and　kept　his　smile.　This　was　life,　this　was　show　business.　If　only　the　police　chief　would　give　him　some　protection.

Or　his　wife.　She　could　have　stopped　all　this,　if　she　had　wanted　to.　All　she　had　to　do　was　tell　these　rascals　that　the　only　thing　Lotus　Charm　had　to　sell　was　her　art.　If　only　his　wife　would　explain　that　—　but　she　wouldn't.　Mrs.　Fang　had　her　own　plans　for　Lotus　Charm.

Lotus　Charm　was　embarrassed　by　all　the　attention.　She　guessed　what　the　men　wanted,　and　she　wasn't　interested.　But　whenever　she　left　her　room,　she　had　to　face　them.　Usually　she　begged　Phoenix　Girl　to　come　with　her.　Phoenix　Girl　always　refused.　She　didn't　want　to　appear　beside　her　beautiful　sister.　She　knew　that　the　men　in　the　living　room　were　there　to　feast　their　eyes　on　Lotus　Charm,　and　that　they　wouldn't　give　her　a　second　look.　So　she　told　Lotus　Charm　to　go　out　alone,　and　her　attitude　made　it　plain　that　her　adopted　sister　was　a　man's　plaything,　while　she　was　a　lady　with　social　status.

Finally　Lotus　Charm　would　walk　out　alone　—　like　an　actress　making　an　exit.　And　she　nearly　always　walked　straight　across　the　room　—　without　giving　any　of　the　men　a　look　—　right　into　her　mother's　room　on　the　other　side.　She　knew　that　she　dared　not　give　the　men　a　glance,　or　they　would　all　jump　up　and　surround　her.

These　morning　walks　across　the　living　room　were　sad　experiences　for　her.　She　knew　she　was　just　an　orphan　—　a　little　drum　singer　—　and　the　most　she　could　ever　expect　from　her　adopted　mother　was　a　little　kindness.　There　would　never　be　real　affection.　She　had　grown　up　now,　and　she　needed　love　and　advice.

With　her　womanhood　in　bloom,　her　little　breasts　showing　to　the　world,　and　the　soft　curves　revealing　themselves　under　her　gowns,　she　desperately　needed　security　and　comfort.　And　knowledge！　There　were　things　she　wanted　to　discuss　with　Mrs.　Fang,　and　dared　not.　Who　then　would　tell　her？

Each　morning　as　she　walked　through　the　crowded　living　room,　she　hoped　she　would　find　her　mother　in　a　sweet,　gentle　mood.　But　usually　Mrs.　Fang　was　feeling　mean.　“Go　out　and　entertain　your　guests,　worthless,"　she　would　croak.　With　a　fixed　smile　on　her　face,　Lotus　Charm　would　go　back　into　the　room,　hoping　with　all　her　heart　that　she　looked　like　a　twelve_year_old　and　praying　that　her　womanly　figure　might　shrink　away.

She　had　noticed　what　men　did　to　girl　singers　—　how　they　kissed　their　hands　and　stroked　their　thighs.　She　knew　that　girls　went　off　with　men,　sometimes　without　their　parents'　permission.　And　she　knew　that　streetwalkers　were　paid　for　something,　but　she　didn't　know　for　what.　She　relied　implicitly　on　the　protection　of　her　father.　Pao　Ching　was　both　mother　and　father　to　her,　manager　and　tutor.　Whenever　she　heard　a　story　about　a　girl　running　off,　or　going　to　bed　with　a　man,　she　thought　it　amusing,　particularly　because　it　was　told　in　whispers.

She　had　noticed　too,　when　she　and　her　father　sang　at　rich　men's　houses,　that　some　of　the　girl　singers　allowed　men　to　fondle　them,　and　received　fancy　presents.　She　had　asked　Phoenix　Girl　why　men　gave　presents　to　girls　just　to　touch　them.　Phoenix　Girl　should　know　all　the　answers,　with　her　social　status,　Lotus　Charm　thought.　But　Phoenix　Girl　merely　got　red　in　the　face.　Lotus　Charm　turned　to　Jeweled　Lute,　who　made　money　on　the　side　by　going　out　with　men,　but　Jeweled　Lute　only　giggled　and　said,“You　are　too　young.　Children　shouldn't　ask　questions."

The　only　thing　was　to　ask　Pao　Ching.　Lotus　Charm　found　it　extremely　difficult,　however,　to　put　her　question　to　her　father.　When　she　finally　plucked　up　her　courage,　Pao　Ching　blushed.　She　had　never　seen　a　man　so　unhappy.　She　would　always　remember　how　he　puckered　his　brow　and　rubbed　his　shiny　pate　thoughtfully　with　his　hands.　After　a　while,　he　said,“I　wouldn't　ask　about　such　things,　child.　They　are　too　low　for　you　to　think　about."

Lotus　Charm　wasn't　satisfied.　She　detected　reproof　in　Pao　Ching's　tone.　Her　face　burned　with　sudden　shame,　and　there　was　anger　and　frustration　inside　her.　“But,　father,"　she　blurted　out,　“if　that　is　low,　then　our　business　is　low,too.　I　know　lots　of　girls　who　do　it."

“Some　years　ago,"Pao　Ching　said,“all　opera　singers　and　artists　were　considered　of　no　account　—　little　better　than　slaves　and　beggars.　But　times　have　changed.　So　long　as　we　ourselves　are　honest　and　upright,　we　cannot　be　classed　as　lowly　worthless　people."　Lotus　Charm　thought　awhile.　Her　father　hadn't　told　her　how　the　social　status　of　stage　people　had　changed,　though　often　he　had　told　her　that　they　were　singing　songs　that　were　a　thousand　years　old.

“Then　why　don't　we　go　in　for　some　other　kind　of　business,　papa？"　she　asked.

Pao　Ching　didn't　answer.

Lotus　Charm　decided　that　her　job　was　a　lowly　one;　she　would　never　amount　to　anything　socially.　This　time,　as　she　walked　into　the　room　full　of　men,　she　decided　to　be　entertaining,　to　see　what　might　happen.　But　she　saw　her　father　standing　by　the　door,　changed　her　mind,　and　ran　like　a　mouse　into　her　bedroom.　There　she　stayed　playing　domino　solitaire　until　it　was　time　to　go　to　the　theater.　When　she　went　down,　two　of　her　admirers　were　still　there.

Mrs.　Tang　kept　up　her　visits.　She　knew　why　all　the　men　were　waiting　in　the　living　room,　and　she　thought　it　would　be　amusing　to　entertain　them.　Also,　she　had　decided　to　take　revenge　on　the　Fangs　—　her　friendly　enemies,　those　robbers　who　cheated　her　and　her　family　of　the　good　things　of　life.　She　started　telling　the　men　that　all　they　needed　to　get　Lotus　Charm　was　enough　money.　Patience　and　money,　she　said.

But　she　had　reckoned　without　Pao　Ching.　If　one　thing　made　him　speak　his　mind,　it　was　anything　that　menaced　Lotus　Charm.　One　day　he　opened　up　on　Mrs.　Tang.　He　was　angry,　his　face　red,　his　voice　stern.　“Please,"　he　said,　“if　you　come　here,　go　and　sit　in　my　wife's　room.　I　don't　need　you　to　entertain　our　guests."

Mrs.　Tang　laughed.　She　snapped　her　fingers　and　cackled　like　a　hen　which　has　just　laid　a　double_yolked　egg.　“Ho！　Ho！　Is　it　wrong　for　me　to　entertain　these　charming　people？"　She　spoke　in　a　loud　voice.　“So,　I　am　wrong.　And　they　are　all　having　such　a　good　time."

Pao　Ching　looked　at　her　sternly,　wrath　in　his　eyes.　“I　do　not　wish　it,"　he　said.　“I　beg　you　to　remember　that　this　is　not　a　house　of　prostitution.　It　is　a　theater　—　the　home　of　the　arts."

Mrs.　Tang's　face　spat　venom　as　she　said,　“Huh,　we'll　see.　I've　yet　to　find　any　good　in　our　profession."And　with　a　swing　of　her　gargantuan　hips,　she　flounced　back　to　the　men.

For　several　days　she　stayed　away.　However,　she　told　Jeweled　Lute　not　to　go　backstage　between　her　acts.　If　she　wanted　to　rest,　she　said,　she　was　to　go　to　Lotus　Charm's　bedroom.　She　knew　Pao　Ching　would　hate　that.

So　Pao　Ching　had　another　worry.　He　wanted　the　two　girls　to　become　friends　as　much　as　he　wanted　the　plague.　And　there　was　Jeweled　Lute　lolling　in　Lotus　Charm's　room,　with　her　heavy　perfumes,　and　her　lazy　arrogance.

Jeweled　Lute　used　Lotus　Charm's　room　for　makeup.　She　came　early　in　the　afternoon　to　fix　her　lips,　her　nails,　her　eyebrows.　And　she　used　all　Lotus　Charm's　makeup.　This　Lotus　Charm　did　not　like.　It　was　all　right　for　Phoenix　Girl　to　take　some,　but　not　a　professional　like　Jeweled　Lute.　She　earned　money　and　should　buy　her　own.　Lotus　Charm　took　her　troubles　to　her　father.　Pao　Ching　shrugged　his　shoulders.　He　did　not　want　to　make　an　issue　of　such　a　little　thing.　“Don't　worry,"　he　said,　“I'll　buy　you　more,　when　that　is　all　used　up."

Lotus　Charm　knew　he　would,　but　she　did　not　see　why　he　should　have　to　pay　for　Jeweled　Lute's　make_up.

“Look　here,"　she　said　very　firmly　one　day,　“that　powder　of　mine　is　expensive."

Jeweled　Lute　grinned　happily.　“Of　course,　it　is.　That's　why　I　like　it.　I　can't　afford　it　myself."　And　she　used　more,　dabbing　it　under　her　arms　and　over　her　body,　filling　the　room　with　fine　white　dust　as　she　shook　out　the　powder　puff.　Lotus　Charm　was　pale　with　anger.

One　day　Jeweled　Lute　turned　up　with　a　man.　They　walked　right　into　Lotus　Charm's　bedroom,　and　sat　on　the　bed.　Lotus　Charm　blushed,　and　got　up　to　go.　But　she　felt　she　could　not　leave　Jeweled　Lute　in　her　room.　She　might　steal　everything　she　had.　Besides,　where　was　she　to　go？　If　she　went　to　her　mother,　across　the　living　room,　there　might　be　a　scene.　Yet　she　did　not　want　to　watch　Jeweled　Lute　entertain　a　man.　But　then　she　thought　she　might　as　well　see　what　happened　when　a　girl　entertained　a　man.　Was　it　really　low？　She　would　have　to　know　one　day.　So　she　sat　down　to　watch.

Jeweled　Lute　and　her　guest　were　talking　and　joking　like　ordinary　people.　There　seemed　nothing　wrong　with　that.　Then　they　held　hands,　but　it　still　didn't　seem　bad.　When　finally　they　left,　Lotus　Charm　wondered　if　the　man　had　paid　money　just　to　sit　on　the　bed　and　talk　to　Jeweled　Lute.

Then　one　day　she　walked　into　her　bedroom.　Jeweled　Lute　was　lying　on　the　bed　with　a　man　kissing　her.

Lotus　Charm　was　furious.　She　wanted　to　throw　them　out,　but　she　could　not　offend　Jeweled　Lute　because　of　her　father's　business.　At　the　same　time,　she　was　curious　to　see　what　they　were　doing.　The　thought　made　her　blush.　She　ran　into　her　mother's　room.　She　thought　her　mother　would　know　how　to　deal　with　such　matters　better　than　she.

Mrs.　Fang　was　half　drunk,　but　she　sensed　what　was　going　on.　She　grunted　to　herself.　This　daughter　of　hers.　A　silly　little　virgin.　Of　course　a　virgin　was　worth　more　than　a　professional,　but　what　tiresome　ideas　some　girls　had.　Let　Jeweled　Lute　earn　an　extra　dollar！　The　girl　had　to　have　a　bed　somewhere.　Perhaps　it　would　be　a　good　thing　if　Lotus　Charm　lost　hers.　It　would　open　Pao　Ching's　eyes.　He　was　stupid　about　this　girl.　Whoever　heard　of　keeping　an　adopted　daughter　like　a　queen.　Mrs.　Fang's　thoughts　were　ugly　as　she　squinted　at　her　frightened　daughter.“Oh,get　out,"　she　cried.　“You　are　a　show　girl　like　her.　Who　do　you　think　you　are？"

She　raised　her　wine　cup　and　held　it　in　mid_air,　as　if　making　a　decision.　Then　she　suddenly　threw　it　at　Lotus　Charm.　It　missed,　but　the　liquid　spattered　brown_yellow　over　Lotus　Charm's　dress.

For　a　moment　Lotus　Charm　stood　speechless,　unable　to　think,　powerless　to　move.　So　her　mother　wanted　her　to　be　like　Jeweled　Lute.　Her　mother　didn't　care,　didn't　love　her.　Black　rage　rose　in　Lotus　Charm's　heart.　She　wanted　to　strike　this　woman,　to　rip　her　coarse　skin　with　her　nails,　to　curse　her.

But　she　turned　and　ran　down　to　the　theater　in　search　of　Pao　Ching.　He　was　not　there.　To　the　front　of　the　house.　Where　was　he？　She　went　back　to　the　darkened　stage.　There　she　stood　and　stamped　her　feet　and　cursed.　Only　the　echo　of　her　anger　came　back　from　the　empty　house.

Then　blindly　she　walked　out　—　to　the　only　friendly　person　in　the　whole　world,　Useless　Fang.

Lotus　Charm　ran　all　the　way　across　town　to　the　hotel　where　Useless　Fang　lived.

“Tell　me　the　whole　story,"　he　said,　with　all　the　solemnity　of　a　judge　ordering　a　witness　to　relate　his　version　of　a　crime.　As　he　heard　Lotus　Charm's　story　he　released　a　string　of　oaths,　descriptive　of　his　judgment　on　Jeweled　Lute　and　her　parents.

His　suggestions,　however,　were　less　than　judicial.　He　would　go　to　the　theater　and　beat　Jeweled　Lute　till　she　could　no　longer　wag　her　bottom　at　a　man.　He　would　challenge　the　entire　Tang　family　to　a　duel.　He　would　express　himself　forcibly　to　fat　old　Mrs.　Tang.　Lotus　Charm　shook　her　head.　None　of　these　would　do.　Her　father's　business　must　not　be　upset　on　her　account.

Useless　Fang　sat　on　the　bed,　and　scratched　his　head　with　his　long　dirty　fingernails.　Then　what　should　be　done？　The　situation　was　intolerable.

Having　told　her　story　Lotus　Charm　felt　better.　Useless　Fang　loved　her,　she　was　sure,　and　it　was　pleasant　to　have　such　a　sympathetic　listener.　And　his　cursing　was　educational.　Such　scholarly　epithets.

Useless　Fang　had　a　ready　suggestion.　If　Lotus　Charm　had　funds　they　could　go　to　a　restaurant　and　eat.　Or　they　could　buy　some　tangerines.　He　knew　where　for　fifty　cents　they　could　buy　enough　tangerines　to　give　the　whole　family　a　stomach　ache.　And　he　knew　a　pleasant　spot　on　the　hillside　where　they　could　sit　and　eat　them.

Lotus　Charm　suggested　it　would　be　better　if　he　took　her　home,　because　her　father　would　be　worried.

“Let　them　all　worry,"　said　Useless　Fang.　“There　is　no　need　to　go　back　to　that　den　of　vice　until　it　is　time　for　the　show.　If　they　dare　scold　you　I　will　tear　down　the　whole　theater　with　my　own　hands.　Come,　let　us　go　buy　the　tangerines.　I　shall　think　better　on　a　full　stomach,as　my　eyes　enjoy　the　beauty　of　nature."





