Second　Act


Time:　Seven　or　eight　years　after.　Railways　have　already　been　built　in　China.　Although　there　are　not　many　of　them,　but　they　have　already　put　Mr.　Wang　out　of　work.　The　age　of　boxers　is　over.

It　is　noon,　a　day　before　the　Moon　Festival.

Place:　Wang　Ta-ch'eng's　courtyard,　like　the　fists　scene,　of　Act　I.　However,　the　leaves　of　the　willow　tree　are　all　gone,　the　morning　glories　on　the　wall,　are　half　dead　only　a　few　yellow　leaves　hanging　there.　The　narrow　bench　on　which　WSM　used　to　take　her　exercise　is　still　there　but　on　the　bench　there　are　only　a　few　red　and　green　hot　peppers.　The　wooden　case　for　spears　is　gone,　the　paper　on　the　window　has　quite　a　few　holes,　From　the　corner　of　the　room　to　the　willow　tree　a　clothes　line　is　stretched　with　a　few　pieces　of　laundry.

Characters:　Wang　Ta-cheng,　Mrs.　Wang,　Wang　Shih-mei,　Ting　Te-sheng,　Li　Chan-yuan,　Sung　Ming-liang　and　Ch'en　Hsiang-yu

Curtain:

Wang　Ta-ch'eng　now　several　years　older　has　some　grey　hairs,　although　he　is　now　poor,　yet　he　is　still　strong　and　proud.　Although　the　weather　is　chilly　he　is　still　wearing　summer　clothes,　partly　because　he　is　poor　partly　because　he　is　so　strong.　He　is　sitting　on　the　little　stool　beneath　the　willow　tree,　sharpening　the　point　of　the　spear　vigorously.　After　rubbing　it　a　while,　he　puts　the　spear　in　front　of　him,　closes　one　eye　to　see　whether　the　spear　and　the　handle　are

straight,　then　he　would　touch　the　spear　and　feel　its　smoothness　giving　the　impression　as　if　he　were　caressing　a　kitten;　suddenly　he　hears　very　clearly　the　whistles　of　the　train,　stops　handling　the　spear.

Wang　TC:　（loudly　and　angrily）　Now　you　whistle,　you　whistle,　you　whistle.　You　took　away　all　my　business　from　me　and　you　are　well　pleased　and　whistle　about　it.　His　mother's.

Mrs.W:　（hearing　her　husband's　cursing,　comes　out　of　the　room　quickly,　in　her　hands　holds　needlework）　Oh,　you　are　talking　to　yourself！　You　frightened　me.　I　thought　you　were　quarrelling　with　someone.

WTC:　Why　should　I　quarrel　with　anybody？　I　am　here　cursing　the　trains.　It　took　away　all　my　business　yet　it　wants　to　remind　me　every　daily　by　whistling　about　it,　as　if　it　were　telling　me　“Wang　Ta-ch'eng　you　are　no　good”,　your　carts,　horses,　swords,　spears　have　all　become　useless,　only　I　am　able　to　do　the　business　of　cargo　transporting　now.　His　mother's.

Mrs.W:　（smiles　sadly）　Oh　cursing　is　useless.

WTC:　（also　smiles　sadly）　You　are　right.　I　wish　I　could　pull　out　all　the　railway　tracks　and　with　my　fists　smash　the　engines　to　pieces,　and　my　feet　and　fists　knock　down　all　the　red　and　green　signals,　that　would　make　me　feel　a　lot　better.

Mrs.W:　Oh　you　are　talking　and　takling,　we　are　made　of　flesh,　the　trains　are　made　of　iron　and　there　is　nothing　more　to　be　said　about　it.

WTC:　Hm　...　（as　though　talking　to　himself）　I　remember　a　few　years　ago　I　and　my　cargoes　went　over　high　mountains　and　wide　rivers,　when　I　was　shouting　“Ah,　hai”,　it　seemed　as　if　mountains　were　trembling,　but　now　when　I　hear　the　train　whistle,　I　tremble.　What　an　age！　（looks　at　his　wife　and　subdues）　Don't　you　worry,　although　I　cannot　fight　with　revolvers　and　trains　I　still　can　box,　this　long　spear　is　still　mine,　I　can　go　to　a　fair　and　show　my　boxing　and　still　make　a　living,　（getting　excited）　Niu-niu's　mother,　look　at　this　spear,　come　here　to　feel　it,　the　more　I　use　the　smoother　it　gets.　Whenever　I　put　down　my　spear　at　a　fair,　I　immediately　attract　a　crowd　of　people　and　they　whisper　to　each　other,　“Now　Big　Spear　Wang,　Big　Spear　Wang”,　ha,　ha,　after　all　this　boxing　still　belongs　to　me,　even　the　railways　cannot　take　away　my　boxing.

Mrs.W:　No,　I　have　no　time　to　feel　your　spear,　tomorrow　is　the　Moon　Festival　and　your　spear　is　not　exactly　made　of　pork　and　for　such　a　festival　we　cannot　be　without　pork　for　Niu-niu　and　all　our　pupils.

WTC:　Yes,　tomorrow　is　the　Moon　Festival.　I　must　be　going　at　once.　I　will　go　to　play　hard　for　the　whole　day　and　I　will　get　some　pork.　If　I　myself　have　nothing　to　eat　and　drink　it　really　does　not　matter　because　I　had　my　share　long　ago,　but　for　the　young　people　we　have　to　do　something　for　the　holiday.　Yes,　I　am　going　（stands　up　and　carries　his　spear　on　his　shoulder）

TTS:　（coming　into　the　gate,　several　years　older,　yet　he　still　looks　stupid;　wears　a　redcap　uniform　and　his　trousers　just　cover　his　knees;　in　his　hand　he　holds　a　clay　rabbit　that　is　beautifully　painted　which　is　usually　given　for　children　to　play　with　during　the　Moon　Festival.　As　soon　as　he　enters　the　courtyard　he　calls　loudly）　Shih-mei,　where　are　you,　Shih-mei？

Mrs.W:　（not　knowing　whether　to　smile　or　cry）　You,　realy　you.　Don't　you　know　that　your　Shih-mei　is　grown　up　now？　And　you　still　bring　toys　to　her？

WTC:　（puts　down　his　spear）　You　are　a　real　fool.

TTS:　Well,　then　...　（finally　realises　his　foolishness　and　laughs）　You　see　Mrs.　Wang,　in　the　past　years　every　Moon　Festival　I　always　bought　something　for　my　teacher,　and　you　as　presents,　and　I　used　to　buy　quite　a　few　rabbits　for　my　Shih-mei.

Now　I　am　rather　hard-up　I　cannot　bring　presents　to　my　teacher　and　his　wife,　so　at　least　I　should　give　my　Shih-mei　a　rabbit.

WSM：　[HT6]　（coming　out　from　the　room,　she　is　grown　up,　very　strong,　good　looking,　has　a　long　pigtail.　Although　her　clothes　are　old,　yet　very　clean）　Why　is　this　urgent　call？

TTS:　Shih-mei,　I　don't　care　whether　you　want　this　or　not,　anyhow　I　bought　it　especially　for　you　（hands　her　the　rabbit）

WSM:　Elder　brother,　really！　（yet　she　takes　the　rabbit）

TTS:　Shih-mei,　please　give　me　some　tea,　I　am　so　thirsty.

WSM:　What　good　things　have　you　had　to　eat？

TTS:　Well,　a　large　ping　（a　pizza）.

WSM:　Oh,　you　have　a　bottomless　stomach！　（goes　back　into　the　room）

TTS:　Teacher,　there　is　a　job　at　the　railway　station.　What　about　you？　I've　put　in　a　word　for　you　to　Mr.　Ch'en,　the　foreman　and　he　said　that　if　you　are　willing　to　come,　you　can　have　the　job.

WTC:　Oh,　I　thank　you　for　your　efforts,　my　boy,　but　I　just　cannot　bear　to　see　the　station.　Ever　since　the　railways　have　taken　away　all　my　business　I　just　hate　them,　to　say　nothing　about　being　a　redcap.　Even　if　they　would　ask　me　to　be　a　station　master　I　still　won't　go.

Mrs.W:　You　are　just　as　stubborn　as　before.　It　seems　to　me　that　being　a　redcap　is　better　than　playing　spears　and　swords　at　a　fair.　Redcaps　get　their　pay　but　when　you　show　off　your　boxing　to　the　bystanders,　you　beg　money　from　them.

WTC:　Begging　money？　I　know　how　to　box　and　I　do　it.　If　they　are　willing　to　give,　they　give,　if　they　are　not　willing　to　give　any　money,　then　we　just　destined　to　meet.　I　learned　boxing　when　I　was　a　youth　and　I　still　can　make　a　living　by　it.　If　I　become　a　redcap　everyday　I　will　see　one　carload　of　goods　after　another　which　should　really　have　been　transported　by　me,　I　could　not　take　that！

Mrs.W:　I　am　not　going　to　waste　any　more　words　on　you,　you　stubborn　fellow！　（goes　into　the　room）

TTS:　Teacher,　you　too　are　right.　This　afternoon　I　have　off　so　I　will　assist　you　at　the　fair.　When　I　carry　luggage　and　the　cargo　at　the　station　I　perspire　so　much　that　my　clothes　are　wet　through,　but　that　perspiration　does　not　make　me　happy.　When　I　do　boxing,　however,　and　perspire　I　should　call　that　perspiration　“Happy　Perspiration”.　Don't　you　agree　with　me,teacher？

WTC:　（puts　his　hand　on　TTS's　shoulder）　Good　fellow,　now　you　talk　sense;　now　let　us　go　to　the　fair　and　we　will　show　off　our　boxing　for　the　rest　of　the　day.　Then　we　can　bring　home　some　meat　to　celebrate　the　Moon　Festival.

WSM:　（comes　out　of　the　room,　carrying　a　small　wooden　tray　on　which　stands　one　teacup　and　one　teapot　and　one　green-glazed　serving　cup　with　tea　for　TTS）　（to　TTS）　Brother,　don't　you　think　this　cup　will　be　enough　for　you？

（fists　gives　the　teapot　and　teacup　to　her　father,　then　handles　the　big　serving　cup　full　of　tea　to　TTS）　And　it　is　just　right　for　you　because　it　is　cold.

TTS:　（laughs）　Good　sister.　This　will　save　my　life　（drinks　all　the　tea　in　one　breath）　Ah！　This　is　really　to　my　heart's　content.　Good　sister,　I　will　buy　another　rabbit　for　you.　（to　WTC）　Where　are　the　weapons？　I　will　go　first　to　prepare　the　arena.

WSM：　Why,　brother,　are　you　going　also　today？　Father,　I　want　to　go　too.　I　am　your　daughter,　I　know　how　to　box.　Why　should　not　I　go　with　you　and　make　a　little　more　money？

WTC:　（to　TTS）　The　weapons　are　in　the　room.　You　take　them　all　and　I　will　follow　you　immediately.　（TTS　goes　into　the　room）

（to　his　daughter）　No,　your　mother　won't　allow　you　to　go.　Go　and　ask　her,　if　she　allows　you,　you　know　I　won't　stop　you.　We　boxers　don't　differentiate　between　men　and　women,　but　your　mother　is　not　a　boxer　so　she　does　not　understand　this.

WSM：　[HT6]　（wanted　to　go　into　the　room　but　stops　because　Li　Chan-yuan　comes　in　from　outside.　He　is　wearing　a　new　blue　silk　long　robe;　black　silk　sculp-cap　with　a　button.　In　one　hand　he　carried　a　straw　basket　and　in　another　cakes　for　the　holiday　wrapped　in　rattan　straw　and　tied　with　string.　Under　one　of　his　arms,　in　addition,　there　is　a　package　wrapped　in　paper）　Yo,　the　second　brother　is　also　here.　Well,　second　brother,　you　must　have　hit　a　jackpot　（and　she　scrutinizes　him）

LCY:　（to　his　teacher　first）　Teacher,　tomorrow　is　the　Moon　Festival　so　I　want　to　offer　these　gifts—one　has　fruit　and　the　other　the　special　moon　cakes.

WTC:　（receives　the　gifts　in　a　matter-of-fact　way）　Oh,　why　should　you　spend　so　much　money？

LCY:　[WT]Sister,　this　is　for　you.（when　he　handles　the　package　to　the　girl　it　becomes　evident　that　he　is　in　love　with　her.）

WSM:　For　me？　（takes　the　package）　My　suspicion　is　right,　you　must　have　hit　a　jackpot.

TTS:　（comes　out　of　the　room,　carrying　swords,　spears　and　so　on）　Well,　look　who　is　here.　I　am　going　to　the　fair　with　the　master.　Will　see　you　later.　If　you　are　free,　why　don't　you　come　with　us　too.　Let's　get　all　worked　up　and　sweat　and　then　we　will　be　happy.　（leaves　the　courtyard）

（LCY　still　looking　at　shih-mei）

WSM:　Father,　may　I　go　with　him？　（pointing　at　TTS）

WTC:　Why　not　go　in　and　open　the　package.

WSM:　Alright,　I　will　show　the　mother　what　is　in　the　package.　（goes　into　the　room）

WTC:　（seizes　Li　carefully）　Chan-yuan,　have　you　got　a　good　job？

LCY:　Yes,　thanks　to　the　spreading　of　your　good　luck　I　got　a　job　in　the　government.

WTC:　What？　You　cannot　read　the　characters　any　better　than　I　can,　and　you　got　a　job　in　the　government？

LCY:　My　job　does　not　require　any　reading　or　writing,　it　only　needs　my　boxing　skill.

WTC:　（getting　excited）　Really？　That's　good.　Ever　since　the　railways　have　come　to　stay,　I　have　often　told　you　that　we　boxers　have　no　way　of　making　a　living.　But　now　someone　actually　needs　us.　Heavens　will　never　bring　us　to　a　dead　end.

LCY:　Teacher,　if　you　are　willing　to　join　us,　your　boxing,　your　reputation　will　entitle　you　to　at　least　thirty　taels　of　silver　a　month.

WTC:　Don't　joke　at　my　expense,　please.　What　is　your　job？

LCY:　Do　you　know　Duke　Chang？

WTC:　Yes,　what　about　him？

LCY:　Recently　Duke　Chang　gathered　a　group　of　policemen　and　each　one　of　them　must　know　how　to　box.　The　chief　instructor　gets　sixty　taels　of　silver　a　month.　And　who　do　you　think　is　the　chief　instructor？

WTC:　Who？

LCY:　Do　you　remember　a　few　years　ago　a　man　came　to　see　you　and　to　learn　from　you　how　to　use　the　Spear　that　Dismembered　Five　Tigers？　He　had　a　small　pigtail　and　his　name　was　Ch'en　Hsiang-wu？

WTC:　Who？　The　fellow　that　carried　a　small　bundle　and　sitting　there　ate　my　porridge？　Ch'en　Hsiang-wu,　now　the　chief　instructor！　Ha,　ha,　...　Aya,　this　will　kill　me　by　laughter.　If　Ch'en　Hsiang-wu　is　the　chief　instructor,　what　should　my　title　be,　chief,　chief,　chief　instructor？　Haha,　ha,　...

LCY:　Teacher,　that's　what　I've　been　thinking　about.　Now,　teacher,　you　go　and　see　Duke　Chang　and　challenge　Ch'en　Hsiang-wu　before　the　eyes　of　the　Duke.　Eight　Ch'en　Hsiang-wu's　are　no　match　to　you,　you　will　defeat　him　and　you　will　get　the　position　of　the　chief　instructor　and　then　you　will　bring　all　your　pupils　and　we　will　organize　a　Mr.　Wang's　company.　What　do　you　think　of　it？

WTC:　（flattered　and　happy）　Yes,　you　are　right.　I　don't　know　anything　else　about　other　factors　but　as　far　as　boxing　goes　I　cannot　be　under　someone's　command.

LCY:　Well,　now　I　am　going　to　tell　the　Duke　about　you　and　you　must　come　and　challenge　Ch'en　Hsiang-wu.

WTC:　I　Wang　Ta-ch'eng　am　afraid　of　no　one.

LCY:　Good,　I　am　going　to　see　the　Duke　now.

WTC:　Wait　a　moment,　Chan-yuan.　I　am　not　going.　Ch'en　Hsiang-wu　just　got　this　good　job,　why　should　we　be　so　envious　of　him　and　smash　his　rice　bowl.　No！　no！　Let　him　be　the　chief　instructor　and　I　will　go　to　the　fair.　You　know　the　proverb,　the　rivers　of　the　north　don't　interfere　with　the　rivers　of　the　south,　that　is　the　boxers'　code　of　honor.

LCY:　Teacher,　you　are　a　too　soft　hearted　man.　You　know　well　that　Ch'en　Hsiang-wu　is　your　inferior,　why　don't　you　get　his　job？　Surely　if　you　fight　him　you　will　defeat　him.

WTC:　Chan-yuan,　you　still　know　nothing　about　the　boxers'　code　of　honor.　Tell　me,　what　do　you　do？

LCY：　（very　carefully）　Please　don't　tell　anybody　else.　I　have　not　told　anyone　except　you.　Our　duty　is　to　arrest　the　rebels.

WTC:　Rebels？　Who？　Why？

LCY:　（getting　more　cautious）　I　am　told　that　in　many　places　there　are　people　who　have　cut　off　their　pigtails　and　they　want　even　to　kill　the　Emperor.

WTC:　To　kill　the　Emperor？

LCY:　Hm,　yes.　After　we　have　gone　through　the　training,　we　are　appointed　to　different　places　and　if　we　can　catch　a　single　rebel　we　will　get　a　hundred　taels　of　silver　as　a　reward.　It's　a　rather　dangerous　job,but　it　pays.　Teacher,　don't　be　one-track-minded;　why　bother　about　a　code　of　honor,　let　us　go　to　take　over　Ch'en　Hsiang-wu's　position　and　you　will　have　a　good　time　for　a　while.

WTC:　（as　though　talking　to　himself）　Rebels,　rebels？　（suddenly　he　understands）　Chan-yuan　have　not　I　told　you　before　that　we　boxers　during　the　overthrow　of　dynasties,　we　boxers　always　helped　the　rebels？

LCY:　I　don't　remember.

WTC:　Hm,　although　I　cannot　read　yet　I　know　something　about　this:　years　ago　my　teacher　told　me　that　boxers　are　mostly　the　rebels　and　our　Patron　Saint　Chao　Kuang-yin　（wants　to　show　off　his　knowledge）　was　the　man　who　first　rebelled　and　then　became　the　Emperor.　So　you　see　if　the　rebels　are　our　own　people　how　can　we　go　to　arrest　them？　Chan-yuan,　it　is　unimportant　whether　or　not　you　keep　that　job.

LCY:　（afraid　that　his　teacher　would　press　him　to　give　up　the　job,　tells　him　the　truth）　No,　teacher,　I　am　told　the　rebels　are　mostly　educated　men.

WTC:　Educated　men？　What　educated　men？

LCY:　Oh,　people　like　Mr.　Sung.

WTC:　（startled）　What？　（controls　himself　to　get　the　truth　out　of　Li　Chan-yuan）　Mr.　Sung？　You　are　talking　nonsense.　He　is　such　a　pleasant　and　peaceful　man.

LCY:　（regrets　what　he　has　told）　Oh,　I　just　gave　him　as　example.　I　don't　know　anything　about　Mr.　Sung.

WTC:　（suddenly　grasps　Li's　arm）　You　know！　Tell　me,　otherwise　I　won't　let　you　off　here　today.

LCY:　（feels　the　iron　grasp　yet　still　struggling）　Really　I　don't　know　anything,　teacher.　If　I　know　surely　I　would　have　told　you.

WTC:　Don't　sell　your　cunning　to　me.

WSM：　（comes　out　of　the　room,　wearing　a　new　blue　satin　embroidered　vest　which　is　Li's　gift.　She　wanted　to　show　it　off）　Look！　（but　seeing　her　father　and　Li　struggling　stopped）

WTC:　（did　not　notice　his　daughter,　still　speaking　to　Li）　Tell　me,　what　do　you　know　about　Mr.　Sung？　If　you　won't　tell　me　the　truth,　I　will　break　your　arm　to　pieces.

LCY:　（can't　stand　the　pain　any　longer　still　wants　to　get　out　without　saying　the　truth）　Teacher,　teacher,　let　me　go.　I　must　go　and　investigate　Mr.　Sung.

WTC:　There　must　be　some　reason　why　you　suddenly　gave　Mr.　Sung　as　an　example.

LCY:　No,　I　simply　said　because　I　wanted　to　say　something,　that　is　all.

WTC:　I　tell　you,　Chan-yuan,　if　you　dare　to　hurt　a　hair　on　Mr.　Sung.　I　will　wring　your　neck　and　cut　off　your　head.　（takes　his　hand　away　from　Li's　arm）　You　know　Mr.　Sung　is　my　good　friend.

WSM：　[HT6]　（very　carefully　walks　along　the　wall　and　leaves　the　courtyard）

LCY:　Oh　I　know　that,　don't　worry　about　it,　I　respect　your　friends　just　as　much　as　you.

Mrs.　W　:（comes　out　of　the　room）　Yo,　where　is　Niu-niu？　I　say　Chan-yuan　why　did　you　spend　so　much　money　to　buy　that　vest　for　her？　Like　father　like　son,　as　soon　as　you　get　any　money　in　your　hands,　you　want　to　spend　it　immediately,　you　never　think　of　saving　it.

LCY:　（wishing　to　please　Mrs.　Wang）　That　vest　is　not　much.　Gradually　I　will　get　everything　she　needs　and　dress　her　from　head　to　foot.　I　can　never　repay　all　the　kindness　that　my　teacher　showered　on　me.

WTC:　Hm　...　you　sweet　mouthed　and　honey-tongue.　You　know　how　to　talk.　Oh！　I　wonder　whether　Niu-niu　went　to　see　Te-sheng.　Now　that　I　think　of　it　I　seemed　to　have　seen　something　leaving　the　courtyard.

Mrs.W:　That　mad　wench！　She　is　always　longing　to　show　off　at　the　fair.　You　boxers　are　all　alike.　If　you　rest,　you　will　have　pains　in　your　bones.

LCY:　（wanting　to　depart　gracefully　and　find　an　excuse）　Oh,　I　will　go　and　look　for　her.　If　I　find　her,　I　will　surely　tell　her　to　come　home.　Good-bye,　Mrs.　Wang.　（walking　towards　the　gate）

WTC:　Remember　what　I　have　told　you！

LCY:　Yes,　teacher.　（and　leaves）

Mrs.W:　You　ought　to　go　too.　You　told　me　that　you　wanted　to　display　boxing　at　the　fair　for　the　rest　of　the　day　so　that　tomorrow　we　can　celebrate　the　festival.

WTC:　Oh,　I　just　want　to　rest　a　little.　My　mind　is　all　confused.

Mrs.W:　What　confused　you？　It　seems　to　me　that　if　you　don't　want　to　be　a　redcap　you　should　tell　Chan-yuan　to　get　a　good　job　for　you.

WTC:　（losing　patience）　Leave　me　alone,　I　am　so　disturbed　that　I　want　to　think　quietly.　（sits　on　a　little　stool　thinking）

Mrs.W:　Hm,　if　you　are　able　to　think　then　the　willow　tree　can　think　too　（goes　into　the　room）

WSM:　（walking　very　lightly　from　outside　and　went　over　to　her　father）　Father,　Mr.　Sung　is　coming.

WTC:　What！　Did　you　go　to　get　him？

WSM:　（Nods）

WTC:　Good.　You　heard　the　conversation.　Good　girl.　You　have　brains,　but　if　Mr.　Sung　comes　what　shall　I　do？

WSM:　Well,　ask　him.　Father,　do　you　like　my　vest？

WTC:　Not　bad,　but　I　think　Li　Chan-yuan　is　a　tricky　fellow.　Don't　wear　what　he　gives　you.

WSM:　Since　he　already　got　it　for　me,　why　should　not　I　wear　it？　I　have　nothing　to　wear　at　all.　You　taught　him　so　much,　why　should　not　he　spend　some　money　for　me？

WTC:　（smiled）　You　women　are　really　capable.　Each　woman　keeps　an　account　book　in　her　mind　where　all　the　debits　and　credits　are　marked　very　clearly.

WSM:　（Looking　behind　her）　Mr.Sung　is　here　now.

SML:　（a　few　years　older,face　fatter　and　more　experienced.　Wears　an　old　long　robe　with　a　black　sculp-cap.　In　his　hands　holds　two　bottles　of　wine）　Master　Wang,　do　you　want　me　to　celebrate　the　Festival　here.　Miss　Wang,　take　this.

WTC:　（stops　her）　Mr.Sung,　do　we　need　to　give　presents　to　each　other　still？

SML:　There　you　go　again.　I　know　you　always　give　things　to　people　and　don't　get　anything　back　from　them.　These　are　simply　two　bottles　of　wine　and　I　will　come　to　drink　them　myself　tomorrow.　What's　wrong　with　it？

WSM:　Father,since　Mr.Sung　has　brought　them　why　should　we　stand　on　ceremonies？

SML:　Yes,　Miss　Wang　is　more　reasonable.　（gives　the　bottles　to　her　and　looks　at　her）　And　beautiful　too！

WTC:　No,　this　is　not　standing　on　ceremonies.　Whenever　I　receive　anything　from　friends,　I　am　ill　at　ease.

WSM:　Thank　you,　Mr.　Sung.　I　am　going　to　make　some　tea　（with　the　two　bottles　in　one　hand,　picks　up　the　teapot　and　walks　towards　the　room.　Walks　so　lightly　and　proudly　as　though　appreciative　of　Mr.　Sung's　flattery）

WTC:　（gives　a　little　stool　to　Mr.　Sung,　brushes　the　hot　peppers　off　the　bench　and　sits　on　it）　Well,　my　room　is　in　disorder,　so　let　us　sit　here　in　the　courtyard.

SML:　Why　did　you　ask　me　to　come？

WTC:　Well　I　have　something　very　important　to　tell　you.（seems　at　a　loss　for　words）

SML:　Does　it　have　anything　to　do　with　Li　Chan-yuan？

WTC:　Yes,it　has.

SML:　Well,　I　know　everything.

WTC:　（surprised）　You　know　everything.　You　really　want　...

SML:　（nodded）　Otherwise　I　would　not　be　making　friends　with　you.

WTC:　Please　speak　more　clearly.

SML:　Roughly　speaking　I　can　divide　you　boxers　into　two　classes—one　class　is　people　like　you　who　are　always　on　the　side　of　justice　and　righteous　indignation.　If　someone　appeals　to　you　and　asks　you　to　do　something　you　will　jump　and　go　through　a　fire,　and　burn,　and　won't　be　afraid　to　die　ten　thousand　times.　The　other　class　are　the　people　just　like　Li　Chan-yuan　who　are　muddle-headed　and　who　are　easily　attracted　by　food　and　money.　Am　I　correct？

WTC:　Right,　right.　It　is　really　divided　like　this.　Well,　you　really　honor　me　and　if　you　have　any　trouble　just　tell　me　so,　I　will　never　regret　losing　my　head　for　you.　Tell　me　are　you　in　any　danger　now？

SML:　How　can　I　avoid　danger　if　I　want　to　rebel？

WTC:　（very　sincerely）　Mr.Sung,　I　know　you　are　brave　and　fear　nothing　but　I　am　your　friend　and　I　must　help　you,　tell　me,　tell　me　clearly　what　it　is　all　about.

SML:　Oh,　I　cannot　tell　you　all　in　one　word.

WTC:　Do　you　think　I　am　a　fool　that　I　cannot　understand　even　if　you　will　want　to　tell　me？

SML:　Master　Wang,　You　are　no　more　of　a　fool　than　anyone　else.

WTC:　Is　it　that　you　are　afraid　to　involve　me　and　that　is　why　you　don't　want　to　tell　me？

SML:　（losing　his　outward　calmness）　It　really　is　very　hard,　very　hard　to　explain.　It　is　not　me　alone,　if　I　get　more　people　we　will　become　more　powerful,　so　sometimes　I　should　be　ruthless　and　make　friends　join,　although　I　realise　that　I　may　bring　death　to　my　friends　without　any　desire　on　my　part.　If　I　want　to　be　among　the　rebels　I　cannot　be　soft-hearted,　but　...　but　...　on　the　other　hand　I　simply　cannot　give　up　real　friendships,　I　just　cannot　sacrifice　them.　My　work　compels　me　to　be　ruthless　and　heartless　but　my　heart　is　too　human,　so　I　am　in　a　dilemma.　Yes,　long　long　ago　I　took　a　great　liking　to　you.　I　really　wanted　you　to　join　the　cause　but　...　but　...

WTC:　（lost　his　patience）　I　cannot　make　heads　or　tails　of　your　talk.　Now,　you　need　not　tell　me　anything　more　and　I　don't　want　to　know　anything　either.　I　only　want　to　know　one　thing—is　it　true　that　Li　Chan-yuan　wants　to　arrest　you？　What　is　your　crime　that　he　wants　to　arrest　you？

SML:　Do　you　really　want　to　know？

WTC:　Yes.

SML:　How　can　I　explain　this.（silent　for　a　while　then　pushes　up　his　hat　and　his　pigtail　goes　up　with　the　cap,　it　being　sewn　to　the　cap）　Now　you　understand.

WTC:　（very　much　surprised）　Really,　I,　I　don't　understand！

SML:　（puts　back　his　cap）　You　will　understand　gradually.

WTC:　（thinks　a　while）　No　matter　whether　I　understand　or　not,　I　will　not　allow　Li　Chan-yuan　to　hurt　a　hair　on　you.　I　don't　know　what　you　want　to　do　but　I　know　I　am　your　friend　and　I　also　know　we　boxers　often　assisted　the　rebels.

SML:　I　have　nothing　more　to　say.　As　a　rule　my　mind　is　not　easily　disturbed,　but　now　Master　Wang　I　am　confused　because　of　you.　Well,I　will　see　you　again.　（stands　up）　Don't　tell　anybody　else.　（points　at　his　cap）

WTC:　（also　stands　up）　I　am　not　as　foolish　as　all　this.

SML:　Will　you　come　to　me　to　celebrate　the　Festival？

WTC:　Oh,　please　come　here,　we　have　more　people　here.

SML:　Good,　tomorrow　we　will　have　a　good　drink.　（walks　towards　the　gate）

WTC:　（following　him）　Come　early,　I　will　not　remind　you　again.

WSM:　（comes　out　of　the　room,　carrying　tea　tray）　Yo！　He　is　gone.　（she　puts　the　tray　on　the　ground　and　walks　towards　the　gate　and　meets　her　father　coming　from　the　gate）　Father,　father.

WTC:　What？　You　are　pretty　late　with　your　tea,　the　guest　is　gone　already.　It　is　not　the　way　to　treat　guests.

WSM:　I　was　listening　to　you　all　the　time　so　I　forgot　about　the　boiling　water.

WTC:　You　should　be　punished.（smiled）　Did　you　hear　everything？

WSM:　（points　to　her　pigtail）　I　also　saw.

WTC:　You　saw　it？　You　must　not　tell　a　soul　about　it.　It　means　life　or　death　to　Mr.Sung.

WSM:　I　hope　I　won't　be　so　foolish　as　to　mention　it　ever.　Father,　we　must　get　a　bodyguard　for　Mr.　Sung,　I　am　willing　to　be　one.　I　have　learned　a　lot　of　boxing　but　I　never　had　a　chance　to　use　it,　so　now　I　want　to　protect　Mr.　Sung.　If　Li　Chan-yuan　dares　to　lay　his　hand　on　Mr.　Sung,　I　will　fight　him　and　he　is　inferior　to　me　in　boxing.

WTC:　Are　you　brave　enough　for　that？

WSM:　I　am　your　daughter！

WTC:　That's　well　put　indeed.　But　you　are　a　girl,　how　can　you　be　with　Mr.　Sung　all　the　time？

WSM:　Oh　I　can　dress　up　as　a　boy.　When　I　was　little　you　told　me　a　lot　of　stories　where　girls　were　disguised　as　boys.

WTC:　Yes,　but　Niu-niu　he　is　my　friend,　why　should　you　be　...

WSM:　You　are　fond　of　educated　men,　are　you　not？

WTC:　（nods）　Yes,　educated　men　has　this,　（points　to　his　head）　we　have　this,　（shows　his　clenched　fists）　that　is　the　reason　why　I　respect　him　so　much.

WSM:　I　also　...　Oh,　Mr.　Sung　not　only　has　brains　he　is　also　courageous.

WTC:　Now　you　little　wench,　your　mind　is　beginning　to　develop,　now　you　can　understand　what　makes　people　work,　I　always　thought　of　you　as　a　child　still.　Niu-niu,　it　really　is　a　pity　....

WSM:　（lowers　her　head）　What　is　the　pity？

WTC:　Niu-niu,　if　you　want　to　help　Mr.　Sung,　we　must,　there　is　nothing　else.

WSM:　I　know　how　to　help　him.　You　have　seen　my　new　vest.

WTC:　Heng！　Li　Chan-yuan　cares　only　about　money　and　has　no　feeling　towards　friends　and　friendship.　You　had　better　not　wear　this　vest.

WSM:　I　must　wear　it　because　if　I　wear　it　I　can　gradually　get　the　truth　out　of　Chan-yuan,　so　I　can　make　him　tell　me　all　about　Mr.　Sung.　When　he　gave　me　this　vest　he　must　have　had　a　purpose,　so　I　must　wear　it.

WTC:　Really,Niu-niu,　your　heart　is　beginning　to　have　so　many　openings.　But　you　are　right,　you　are　right.　I　cannot　make　him　tell　me　the　truth,　but　you　can.　Well,　now　I　must　be　going.

WSM:　（pointing　at　the　room）　Mother　is　likely　to　have　a　nap　now,　so　may　I　go　with　you？

WTC:　（before　he　could　reply　to　his　daughter,　he　hears　very　loud　and　varied　noises）

（Ting　Te-sheng　rushes　into　the　courtyard）　What　is　the　matter　Te-sheng？

TTS:　（his　face　sweaty,　carrying　all　the　weapons　and　swords.　As　soon　as　he　enters　the　yard,　throws　the　weapons　on　the　ground）　Teacher,　I　lost　face.　（at　this　moment　several　people　come　into　the　yard）

Crowd:　Master　Wang,　Master　Wang,　Ting　Te-sheng　was　defeated,　defeated.

WTC:　Please,　please,　plesae.　My　good　neighbors　there　is　nothing　to　mull　about.

Crowd:　（unwilling　to　leave）　Now　here　is　the　man　who　defeated　Ting　Te-sheng.　（make　way　for　the　man　and　Ch'en　Hsiang-wu　walks　in　slowly.　CHW　still　has　a　tiny　pigtail　on　his　shoulder　but　his　clothes　are　much　better　looking　than　formerly.　Made　of　real　silk　but　not　well　tailored.　On　his　arm　he　carried　a　long　silk　robe.　As　soon　as　he　come　inside　the　gate,　he　squatted　near　the　wall）

Crowd：　Master　Wang,　Master　Wang　you　must　have　a　contest　with　him,because　he　made　Ting　Te-sheng　lose　face.

WTC:　（still　trying　to　get　the　people　out）　No,　there　is　nothing　to　be　seen　here　because　there　will　be　no　contest　of　any　kind.　Please,　please,　（still　trying　to　get　them　out　one　by　one）　please,　please.

TTS:　（to　the　crowd）　Get　out　of　here！

Crowd:　You　were　defeated　by　that　man　but　now　you　are　nasty　to　us,　pooh.　（gradually　they　leave）

WSM:　What　is　this　all　about,　brother？

TTS:　I　was　in　the　fair　and　he　（points　at　Ch'en）came　along　and　squatted　near　by　when　he　saw　me　demonstrating　he　started　hissing　at　me.

WSM:　So　you　lost　your　temper.

TTS:　How　could　I　control　myself？　So　we　had　a　fight.

WSM:　And　you　were　defeated.

TTS:　（not　able　to　speak　any　more,　slaps　his　own　face）　I　lost　face！

WTC:　How　many　times　have　I　told　you　that　behind　our　backs　there　are　people　who　are　better　than　we　are　and　that　we　should　not　pick　a　fight　with　anyone.

TTS:　When　I　was　hissed　at　I　could　not　help　starting　a　fight.　I　am　your　pupil.

CHW:　It　was　not　his　fault,　I　challenged　him　on　purpose.

WTC:　（looks　at　Ch'en　very　carefully）　You,　are　you　not　Master　Ch'en

CHW:　（slowly　rising　up　and　bows　to　WTC）　I　think　I　am.　How　are　you　sir？

WSM:　Master　Ch'en.　chief　instructor　Ch'en！

WTC:　Te-sheng,　come　here,　you　apologize　to　Master　Ch'en.

TTS:　（turns　his　back）　No,　I　cannot.　It　is　not　my　fault.

CHW:　Yes　I　challenged　him.

WTC:　（getting　angry）　Master　Ch'en,　you　are　much　older　than　he,　why　do　you　bother　with　this　stupid　fellow？

CHW:　I　want　to　know　how　good　is　your　boxing.

WSM:　（picks　up　a　spear　from　the　ground）　Master　Ch'en　let　us　have　a　contest.　Please.

CHW:　（again　squats　down）　Oh　we　men　never　fight　a　woman.

TTS:　（takes　the　spear　from　WSM）　Let　us　try　again.

CHW:　Good！　（picks　up　a　sword）　I　will　be　glad　to　keep　you　company.　（straightens　up　and　looks　much　taller）　（should　have　a　display　of　Chinese　fencing　for　five　minutes　or　so　here）

TTS:　（comes　to　the　middle　of　the　courtyard　and　rushes　forward　with　his　spear）　Here　I　come！

CHW:　（very　quickly　knocks　Te-sheng's　spear　out　and　says）　Drop！

TTS:　（drops　his　spear）　Ah！　try　again.　（picks　up　his　spear　again）

WTC:　（stops　him）　Good！　You　really　know　boxing.　Now　it's　my　turn.

WSM:　（stamps　her　feet）　Father,　fight　him.

CHW:　（suddenly　kneels　down）　Master　Wang,　how　dare　I　fight　you？　I　come　here　again　to　learn　the　Spear　that　Dismembered　Five　Tigers.

WTC:　（laughs　very　loudly）　I　know　you　dare　not　fight　me.　（helps　Ch'en　to　get　up）　Please,　get　up！　You　are　clever,　you　know　whom　you　should　fight　and　whom　you　can't.　Please　get　up！

CHW:　No,　I　won't　get　up　unless　you　promise　to　teach　me　that　Spear.

WTC:　Oh,　rise.　（pulls　Ch'en　and　he　purposely　resists　to　try　out　Master　Wang's　strength　but　realizing　that　Wang　is　stronger　than　he,　is　forced　to　rise）　Master　Ch'en　what　is　this　whole　thing　about？

CHW:　I　will　tell　you　if　you　promise　me　to　teach　me　that　Spear,　otherwise,　I　have　nothing　to　say.

WSM:　My　father　only　taught　me　that　Spear,　if　you　want　to　learn　it,　learn　it　from　me.　You　have　just　said　that　men　do　not　fight　with　women,　that　is　good.　Now　I　want　you　to　learn　something　from　a　woman.

TTS:　Good,　Shih-mei,　that　is　right.

CHW:　（becomes　very　polite）　Oh,　Miss　Wang,　it　is　my　fault.　Ting　Te-sheng,　I　am　sorry.　（and　bows　to　each　one　of　them　in　turn）　Will　you　forgive　me　now？

TTS:　（begins　to　be　pacified　and　starts　picking　up　all　the　weapons）　I　am　a　good　for　nothing　but　my　master　and　his　daughter　are　both　very　good.

WTC:　Come,come,　let　us　sit　down　and　talk.　Niu-niu,　give　us　some　hot　water.

WSM:　（whispers　to　her　father）　Don't　forget　to　ask　him　about　Mr.Sung.　He　is　the　instructor.　（and　she　enters　the　room）

CHW:　（unwilling　to　sit　down　says）　I　rather　squat.

WTC:　Tell　me,　Master　Ch'en,　you　want　to　learn　that　Spear　from　me　but　you　insulted　my　pupil　first.　Why？

CHW:　（very　pleased　with　himself）　That's　intelligence,　that's　intelligence.　You　see,　Master　Wang,　all　my　life　I　have　no　other　wish　than　boxing.　My　father　left　me　quite　a　few　acres　of　land,　now　I　sold　it　all.　I　used　to　wander　daily　from　one　famous　boxer　to　another　and　learn　something　from　them.　If　they　refuse　to　teach　me　for　the　first　time,　I　used　to　come　to　them　again.　If　they　refuse　for　the　second　time　I　will　come　back　again　and　again.　I　never　give　up　visiting　them　until　I　learn　what　I　wanted.　To　achieve　my　aim　it　did　not　matter　to　me　whether　I　walked　three,　four　or　five　hundred　miles.　I　want　to　learn　boxing　as　if　I　were　possessed.　So　gradually　I　lost　all　my　property.　After　all　what　is　land,　property　when　my　one　care　in　life　is　boxing.　I　cannot　sleep　knowing　that　there　is　a　kind　of　boxing　that　is　known　by　someone　and　not　me.　I　am　determined　to　learn　it.　You　remember　the　last　time　I　came　here　to　see　you,　I　had　walked　three　hundred　miles,　but　you　refused　to　teach　me.　Now　I　am　here　again　and　being　afraid　of　a　second　refusal,　I　decided　to　challenge　Te-sheng　first.　By　fighting　with　him　I　can　demonstrate　to　you　whether　or　not　I　am　qualified　to　learn　that　Spear　and　if　you　refuse　to　teach　me　now,　well　the　neighbors　know　that　your　pupil　has　been　defeated　by　me　and　consequently　you　will　lose　face　among　them.　That's　intelligence,　intelligence,　ha　...　ha　...　Master　Wang,　please　teach　me,　teach　me,　if　you　don't　I　will　stay　here　forever.　I　will　bore　you　to　death.

WTC:　Te-sheng,　have　you　heard　this？　This　is　the　spirit　of　a　real　boxer.

TTS:　Teacher,　are　you　going　to　the　fair　or　not？　Tomorrow　will　be　the　Festival？

CHW:　（takes　out　a　bill　and　says　to　WTC）　Master　Wang,　this　is　my　introductory　offer.　Tomorrow　I　will　celebrate　the　Festival　here.

WTC:　Certainly,　you　will　enjoy　the　Festival　with　us,　but　I　cannot　take　your　money.

CHW:　（bangs　his　bill　on　the　ground）　If　you　don't　take　it　then　I　am　son　of　a　bitch.

WTC:　You　cannot　take　back　your　words　and　you　force　me　to　take　the　money.　Well,　Te-sheng,　take　the　money　and　get　he　food　for　the　Festival.

TTS:　You　had　better　let　Mrs.　Wang　do　the　shopping.　If　I　buy　some　old　hog's　meat　Mrs.　Wang　will　scold　me.　（picks　up　all　the　weapons　and　walks　toward　the　room）　Mrs.　Wang,　come　here　please.

Mrs.W:　（comes　out　of　the　room）　Why？

TTS:　Oh　Master　Ch'en　gave　some　money　and　you　have　to　go　and　get　the　food　for　the　Festival　and　I　am　going　to　take　a　nap.　（goes　into　the　room）

Mrs.W:　What？　Master　Ch'en　gave　us　money？　Now　we　are　really　the　bedbugs　in　a　hotel,　they　only　bite　guests.

WTC:　Well,there　is　no　other　way　out.　Master　Ch'en　force　me　to　accept　the　money　by　his　forceful　swearing.

CHW:　（stands　up　and　bows　to　Mrs.　Wang　and　quickly　squats　down　again）　Oh,　Mrs.　Wang,　would　you　oblige　us,　if　you　won't,　I　must　be　a　son　of　a　bitch.

Mrs.W:　I　really　don't　know　what　to　do　with　your　kind.　Well,　just　a　moment.　I　want　to　take　the　clothes　down　first.　（takes　down　the　clothes　from　the　line）

WTC:　Master　Ch'en　are　you　really　the　chief　instructor？

CHW:　Yes,　just　to　feed　my　mouth.　Since　I　sold　all　my　land　I　have　to　make　a　living.

WTC:　Do　you　remember　when　you　were　here　last,　I　had　then　a　friend　here,　Mr.Sung,　do　you　remember　him？

CHW:　No.　I　can　only　remember　boxers.

WTC:　Have　you　heard　anything　about　Mr.　Sung？

CHW:　No,　I　don't　bother　about　other　people's　business.

WTC:　Then　why　does　Li　Chan-yuan　know？

CHW:　He　is　a　young　fellow　who　is　ambitious　and　I　am　old　I　have　no　ambition,　so　I　don't　care　to　pry.

WTC:　Hm,hm.　（thinks）

Mrs.W:　（carrying　the　clothes）　I　don't　know　why　you　boxers　talk　about　Mr.Sung　all　the　time,　though　educated　people　are　really　tricky　and　sooner　or　later　you　will　get　into　trouble.

WTC:　Oh,　don't　bother　with　our　business.

Mrs.W:　I　have　to.

CHW:　Alright,　alright　Mrs.　Wang,　you　go　shopping,　so　tomorrow　we　will　have　a　good　feast.

Mrs.W:　Heng！（goes　in）

WTC:　Master　Ch'en,　did　you　tell　me　the　truth？

CHW:　Have　I　ever　told　an　untruth？

WTC:　I　cannot　believe　it.　You　are　the　chief　instructor　yet　you　say　you　know　nothing.

CHW:　（very　seriously）　I　told　you　that　I　got　that　job　just　to　get　something　to　eat.

WTC:　（silent　for　a　while）　Master　Ch'en,　do　you　want　to　learn　that　Spear？

CHW:　I　will　take　you　as　my　teacher,　I　want　to　learn　all　you　know.

WTC:　No,　I　won't　be　your　teacher.　You　are　older　than　I　am.

CHW:　But　boxing　has　no　age.

WTC:　I　will　teach　you.

CHW:　Is　it　true？　（kowtows　to　Wang）

Mrs.W:　（carrying　a　shopping　basket　comes　out　of　the　room）　I　really　don't　understand　what　you　two　are　doing.　Master　Ch'en　you　still　want　to　learn　boxing.　Don't　you　see　how　poor　we　have　become.　My　husband　with　all　his　fame　now　goes　to　the　fair　every　day.　My　first　pupil　now　is　a　redcap　and　my　daughter　with　all　her　knowledge　of　boxing　is　not　even　married.　And　you　still　want　to　learn　boxing？　What　is　the　sense？

CHW:　Mrs.　Wang,　don't　bother　about　us　two,　please.　I　still　want　to　learn　no　matter　whether　it　be　of　any　use　or　not.　（picks　up　the　bill　and　throws　in　into　Mrs.　Wang's　basket）　Now　you　go　and　do　your　shopping.　Please　buy　a　lot　of　meat.　I　alone　can　eat　a　cauldron.

Mrs.W:　（sighed）　Oh　rice　pails,　all　of　you.　（walks　out　of　the　gate）

CHW:　Now　what　about　teaching　me　the　Spear？　（picks　up　Master　Wang's　spear）　and　how　long,　how　heavy,　without　real　training　one　cannot　even　hold　it　up　to　say　nothing　of　using　it.

WTC:　I　will　surely　teach　you　on　one　condition.

CHW:　What　is　the　condition？　Say　it.

WTC:　I　don't　allow　you　to　hurt　a　hair　on　Mr.　Sung's　body.

CHW:　Why　should　I　hurt　him？

WTC:　Now　you　still　are　not　telling　me　the　truth！

CHW:　What　truth？　What　do　you　really　want　to　know？　If　you　don't　believe　me,　I　will　go　and　resign　from　my　job　and　I　will　go　with　you　every　day　to　the　fair.　I　told　you　I　got　the　job　simply　to　feed　myself.　Since　you　are　in　Peking　how　do　I　dare　to　be　the　chief　instructor？　Well,　I　will　go　and　resign　and　go　with　you　to　the　fair　and　then　we　will　be　very　happy　together.　Mrs.　Wang　has　just　said　that　we　are　good　for　nothings,　well　let　us　be　good　for　nothings.　Anyhow　we　don't　give　up　our　boxing　and　besides　if　boxing　can　give　us　something　to　eat,　there　is　nothing　wrong　with　that.　Now,　let　us　both　go　to　the　fair　and　after　that　I　will　tell　the　Duke　Chang　that　I　am　quitting.

WTC:　（very　pleased）　Yes,　you　are　right.　Why　should　we　be　officials.　How　free,　how　happy　we　are　if　we　do　boxing　every　day.　（suddenly　changes　his　mind）　Wait　a　moment,　let　me　think.

CHW:　（again　caressing　the　spear）　Go　ahead　and　think,　I　will　follow　your　decisions.

WTC:　（talks　to　himself）　Heng！　Perhaps　the　whole　plot　was　conceived　by　Chan-yuan.　Niu-niu.

WSM:　（Wang　Shih-mei　comes　out　of　the　room）　What？

WTC:　I　am　going　with　Mr.Ch'en　to　the　fair.　Where　is　Te-sheng？

WSM:　He　is　sleeping.

WTC:　Wake　him　up.　Tell　him　to　go　and　fetch　Li　Chan-yuan.　Ask　Li　Chan-yuan　to　come　here.

WSM:　（calls　from　outside）　Brother,　brother,　get　up.

WTC:　（To　Ch'en）　You　carry　this　spear.　I　will　go　and　get　some　more　weapons.　（Master　Wang　walks　towards　the　room）

TTS:　（still　very　sleepy　and　yawning）　Sleepy,　sleepy！

WTC:　Go　and　get　Li　Chan-yuan.　You　must　find　him,　tell　him　to　wait　for　me　here.

TTS:　（yawns　again,　goes　towards　the　gate）

WSM:　（whispers　to　him）　Tell　Mr.　Sung　to　come　here.　Tell　him　my　father　wants　to　see　him.

TTS:　Alright,　alright.　（leaves）

WTC:　（comes　out　of　the　room,　carrying　some　weapons）　Now　we　are　going,　take　care　of　things　here.

WSM:　（wishing　to　wait　for　Mr.　Sung　but　to　hide　that　asks）　Aren't　you　going　to　take　me　along　with　you？

WTC:　（walks　with　Master　Ch'en　towards　the　gate）　No,　you　wait　here.　When　your　mother　returns　you　will　help　her　to　prepare　all　the　food　for　the　Festival.

CHW:　When　you　cook　the　pork,　put　a　lot　of　salt,　I　like　things　well　salted.　（leave　with　WTC）

WSM:　（seeing　that　they　are　gone,　makes　a　face,　smoothes　her　hair　and　arranges　her　clothes.　A　bit　ashamed　of　herself　but　wanted　to　be　courageous.　Makes　a　few　movements　of　boxing　and　stops　herself　suddenly,　adjusts　her　dress　again）

SML:　（rushes　in　from　the　gate）　Miss　Wang,　your　father　wants　to　see　me？

WSM:　（very　much　pleased　to　see　him,　but　tries　to　hide　it）　Oh,　Father　will　be　back　soon.　Mr.　Sung　sit　here　for　a　while.　Come,　sit　here.

SML:　（did　not　suspect　her,　sits　down　at　her　request）　Where　is　your　father？

WSM：　（pours　some　tea　for　him）　He　will　be　back　soon.　（changed　the　topic　of　conversation）　Mr.　Sung,　there　is　something　I　don't　understand,　why　do　you　respect　my　father　so　much　and　why　does　my　father　is　so　fond　of　you？

SML:　Well,　I　don't　know　why　he　is　so　fond　of　me,　but　I　know　why　I　like　him　so　much.

WSM:　Tell　me,　we　are　uneducated　here.

SML:　Well　you,　the　uneducated　people　are　the　real　people.

WSM:　Really？

SML:　It　is　so.　The　common　people　have　the　sense　of　justice.you　see　since　the　time　that　revolvers　and　railways　have　appeared,　your　father　has　often　said　that　his　usefulness　is　gone　now.　But　in　fact,　the　world　is　always　changing　and　there　is　no　accomplishment　in　the　world　that　can　be　useful　for　all　the　times.　The　sense　of　honor　and　justice　will　make　the　humans　always　very　useful　at　all　times.　I　waned　to　tell　your　father　this　many　many　times　but　I　am　afraid　...

WSM:　What　are　you　afraid　of？

SML:　I　am　afraid　...　Well　I　don't　know　how　to　express　myself.　I　wanted　to　tell　him　a　long　ago　that　his　usefulness　is　even　more　important　than　his　skill　of　boxing　but　I　am　not　cruel　enough　to　tell　him　that.　I　am　afraid　that　if　I　explain　it　to　him　very　clearly　I　would　endanger　him.

WSM:　Do　you　think　I　can　be　very　useful　too？　If　you　are　afraid　to　get　my　father　into　trouble,　what　about　me？　I　would　like　to　take　my　father's　place.　Just　tell　me　and　I　will　do　it.　My　father　is　fond　of　you　and　I　am　fond　of　you　too.

SML:　Miss　Wang,　you　are　also　useful.

WSM:　Am　I？　Tell　me　how？　I　will　obey　you　and　follow　you　everywhere.

SML:　（begins　to　understand　her　feelings,　looks　at　her　and　although　relly　in　love　with　her　hides　that　fact　well）　Oh,　Miss　Wang,　I　have　some　other　business　to　attend　to,　when　your　father　comes　back,　will　you　get　me　then.　（changes　his　topic　of　conversation）　Miss　Wang　（sighs）　it　is　a　pity　....

WSM:　Oh,　please,　don't　go,　don't.　Let　us　talk　a　bit.　When　I　listened　to　your　talk　I　feel　very　happy.　We　boxers　talk　shop　from　morning　till　night　and　I　am　really　tired　of　it.　（Li　Chan-yuan　came　in　from　the　gate　and　listening　to　the　conversation）

SML:　I　really　have　some　business　to　attend　to.　（wants　to　stand　up）　When　there　is　one　absorbing　thing　to　be　done,　all　the　other　matters　are　forgotten.

WSM:　（rather　disappointed　but　still　trying　to　make　a　joke　out　of　it）　Oh,　if　you　want　to　go,　please　do.　Do　you　think　I　will　grab　your　arm？　You　don't　know　how　strong　I　am.　If　I　would　grasp　your　arm,　I　can　break　the　bones　in　it.　Do　you　believe　that？

SML:　（also　jokingly）　You　had　better　not　grasp　me.

LCY:　Sister！

WSM:　（turns　around　quickly）　Yo！　You！

LCY:　（very　angry）　I　have　seen　all.

WSM：　（very　much　ashamed　of　herself,　but　pretends　nothing　took　place）　What　all　have　you　seen？　Don't　you　know　Mr.　Sung？

LCY:　Of　course　I　know　him.　I　want　to　know　him　even　more.

SML:　（not　wanting　to　have　a　scene）　Oh,　Miss　Wang,　I　am　going.　If　your　father　comes　back,　come　to　get　me.　（wanted　to　walk　towards　the　gate）

LCY:　（blocks　Sung's　way）　Wait　a　moment,　I　have　something　to　say　to　you.

SML:　（still　walking　towards　the　gate,　not　heeding　Li）

LCY:　（still　blocking　the　way）　I　have　something　to　say　to　you.

WSM:　（wants　to　avoid　a　scene　too,　but　being　young　cannot　control　himself）　Get　out　of　the　way.

LCY:　（still　in　the　way）　I　tell　you　when　my　teacher　is　not　at　home,　don't　you　come　here　on　the　sly.

SML:　（angry）　Is　this　the　way　you　talk　to　me？

LCY:　And　why　not？　I　tell　you　I　have　your　head　in　my　palm,　so　be　sensible.

WSM:　（getting　very　angry）　You,　Li　Chan-yuan,　you　dare　to　make　trouble　here.　Get　out！

LCY:　（did　not　want　to　offend　the　girl）　Sister,sister,I　have　not　offended　you,　we　belong　to　the　same　family.

WSM:　Who　belongs　to　the　same　family？　What　do　you　want？　（comes　over　to　Li　and　grasps　his　arm）　You　think　you　have　enough　boxing　to　bully　people　around.　I　can　take　on　five　of　you.

LCY:　Why,　sister？　Do　you　want　to　fight　me？

WSM:　Hm.Your　teacher　does　not　have　the　time　to　teach　you　a　good　lesson,　so　I　will　teach　it　to　you.　（tightens　her　grasp）

LCY:　（feeling　her　strength　pretends　to　be　conciliatory）　Stop　it　sister.　Don't　spoil　your　new　vest.

WSM:　（very　quickly　throws　off　the　vest　and　flings　it　at　his　face）　Take　it　back　and　get　out.　（pushes　him　and　he　leaves）

SML:　（still　very　calm）　I　am　sorry,　why　should　you　offend　your　brother　like　this　on　my　account？

WSM:　For　you　I　would　offend　anybody,　but　...　（regrets　her　rashness）　Oh,　I　spoilt　everything.　（tears　come　into　her　eyes）　I,　I　spoilt　everything,　oh,　my　bad　temper,　a　boxer　is　really　hopeless　in　these　situations.　I　should　have　befriended　him　but　why,　why　...　（lowers　her　head　and　wants　to　cry）

SML:　（consoling　her）　Miss　Wang,　Miss　Wang.　I　understand　you,　I　understand　you.

WSM:　I　am　useless,　I　should　be　done　away　with.　（sits　down　on　the　ground）　I　have　offended　him　and　things　will　only　get　worse　and　worse.

SML:　Do　not　mind,　I　am　not　really　afraid　of　him.　I　am　afraid　of　nothing.

（Curtain）





