Chapter　Twenty-six


JN　CHUNGKING，　in　Chengtu，　in　Kunming，　in　Sian，　and　in　many　other　cities　the　people　were　cheering，　singing，　and　weeping　aloud　because　they　were　so　happy;　but　Peiping　was　silent.　The　Japanese　soldiers　in　Peiping　had　not　yet　been　disarmed.　The　Japanese　gendarmes　still　patrolled　the　sreeets.

The　sorrow　and　pain　of　a　conquered　nation　could　not　be　swept　away　by　victory　as　one　wipes　the　dust　off　a　table.　But　there　was　one　gay　thing:　the　Japanese　took　down　their　rising　sun　flags　and　the　Chinese　hung　out　the　flags　with　the　blue　sky　and　the　white　sun.　There　were　no　processions，　no　salvos　of　cannon，　no　cheers，　but　the　flag　with　the　blue　sky　and　the　white　sun　gave　the　people　comfort.

The　White　Pagoda　in　the　North　Sea　Park　still　stood　proudly.　The　lotus　in　the　lakes　had　still　their　red　or　white　petals　and　wanted　gave　out　their　fragrance.　The　altars，　temples，　and　palaces　still　shone　majestically　in　their　gold　and　green　light.　Those　old　and　heavily　glazed　tiles　seemed　always　to　be　newly　made.

Peiping　was　quiet.　In　the　whole　city　in　this　time　of　victory　there　was　no　disturbance.　The　Japanese　had　been　too　hasty　when　they　closed　and　blockded　their　gates.

The　most　silent，　perhaps，　was　the　Chi　family.　Rey　Shuan　helped　his　grandfather　to　his　room　and　the　old　man　sat　on　the　edge　of　his　bed　and　held　Rey　Shuan's　hand.　The　old　man　thought　of　the　difficulties　of　the　past　eight　years　and　wanted　to　curse　in　a　loud　voice.　He　thought　of　his　dead　son，　and　grandson，　and　great-grand-daughter　and　wanted　to　weep　loudly.

Slowly　he　loosened　Rey　Shuan's　hand　and　slowly　lay　down.　Rey　Shuan　called　Little　Preciors　and　told　him　to　stay　and　keep　the　old　man　company.

Little　Precious　was　glad　to　have　this　responsibility.　He　dared　not　go　to　the　room　where　Niu　Niu　lay，　and　he　did　not　want　to　stay　alone　in　the　courtyard.　Without　Niu　Niu　it　seemed　there　was　no　place　for　him.　To　stay　with　the　great-grandfather　was　something　to　do.　Obediently　he　let　the　old　man　hold　his　hand.

The　old　man　shut　his　eyes　as　if　he　were　going　to　sleep　but　the　warmth　of　Little　Precious'　hand　seemed　to　flow　through　the　old　man's　hands　into　his　heart.　He　felt　that　he　was　not　only　alive　and　holding　his　great-grandson's　hand　—　the　oldest　one　and　the　youngest　one　who　had　not　been　killed　by　the　war　—　but　he　seemed　to　be　lying　on　a　cloud　and　to　be　dissolving　into　the　cloud.　He　held　Little　Precious'　hand　more　tightly.　Little　Precious　would　enjoy　peace，　have　sons　and　daughters，　and　the　Chi　family　would　never　cease　to　have　sons　for　the　worship　of　the　ancestors.　He　held　the　hand　of　Little　Precious　even　more　tightly　so　that　the　old　hand　and　the　young　hand　seemed　to　become　one.　The　old　man　opened　his　eyes　as　if　he　wanted　to　say　to　Little　Precious，　“You　and　I　are　the　two　extremes　of　the　four　generations　in　one　house，　we　must　both　live.　What　is　war　if　we　two　can　live？　And　even　if　I　die，　you　must　live　to　be　my　age　and　have　your　own　four　generations　in　one　house.”

Little　Precious　seeing　that　the　old　man　had　opened　his　eyes　wanted　to　talk.　He　said，　“Great-grandfather，　are　you　awake？”

The　old　man　did　not　answer　but　closed　his　eyes　again，　and　on　his　face　there　was　a　slight　smile.

Rey　Shuan　walked　around　the　courtyard　a　few　times　and　looked　through　the　glass　into　the　room.　His　mother　and　his　wife　were　sitting　at　the　head　of　the　bed　looking　at　Niu　Niu.　His　tears　fell　suddenly　and　he　went　away　and　stood　under　the　date　tree.

His　head　ached　and　he　could　not　concentrate.　The　death　of　Niu　Niu　seemed　to　have　crossed　out　all　that　he　had　struggled　for　in　the　last　eight　years.

While　Rey　Shuan　was　standing　under　the　date　tree　Sergeant　Pai　and　Wang　the　Third　came　in.

Sergeant　Pai　was　sweating　from　exertion.　With　one　hand　he　wiped　the　sweat　from　his　head.　The　other　he　stretched　out　to　Rey　Shuan.　“Ha　—　Mr.　Chi，　we　have　won　the　victory！”　He　wanted　to　shake　Rey　Shuan's　hand　affectionately，　but　seeing　Rey　Shuan's　sorrowful　face　he　withdrew　his　hand.　“What　has　happened，　Mr.　Chi？”

Before　Rey　Shuan　could　answer　Wang　the　Third　said，　“Mr.　Chi，　help　me.　We　have　won　the　war，　why　don't　we　go　immediately　to　find　Mr.　Chien　and　my　grandson？　I　beg　you　to　help　me　find　out　where　they　are.”

Rey　Shuan　wanted　very　much　to　go　at　once　with　Wang　the　Third　to　search　for　Mr.　Chien.　But　he　could　nor　rouse　himself　nor　could　he　go　away　and　leave　the　two　women　watching　Niu　Niu's　body.　Who　knew　but　that　the　mother，　in　the　severity　of　her　grief，　might　not　faint　or　even　die.　He　pointed　to　the　room.

Sergeant　Pai　went　over　and　Wang　the　Third　followed　him.

Sergeant　Pai　looked　through　the　glass　into　the　room.　Having　been　a　police　officer　for　many　years，　he　was　acquainted　with　all　manner　of　sorrowful　occasion.　He　knew　that　he　must　find　a　way　to　make　those　two　women　weep　aloud.　If　they　made　no　sound　but　sat　there　staring　at　Niu　Niu　there　could　be　serious　trouble，　especially　with　Mrs.　Tien　Yiu.

“Mr.　Chi，　you　must　start　to　weep　aloud，”　Sergeant　Pai　said　in　a　low　voice　to　Rey　Shuan.　“If　you　weep　aloud　they　will　have　to　weep　with　you.　They　must　weep　aloud　or　the　pain　in　their　hearts　will　suffocate　them，　kill　them.”

Rey　Shuan　had　not　decided　whether　to　follow　Sergeant　Pai's　advice　or　not　when　a　man　and　a　woman　came　in　from　outside.

The　man　was　like　a　slender　black　pagoda，　tall　and　thin　but　with　a　body　strong　and　hard.　His　head　was　bare　and　the　hair　cut　closely　like　that　of　a　soldier.　His　face　was　thin　and　hard　and　dark，　and　there　was　a　light　of　satisfaction　in　his　black　bean　eyes.　He　was　wearing　a　student's　uniform　that　was　two　or　three　sizes　too　small.　The　coat　barely　reached　his　waist　and　the　trousers　showed　half　his　leg.　Although　his　clothes　had　no　style　and　were　unbecoming　he　wore　them　with　a　contented　and　simple　air.　His　head　was　held　high　and　there　was　a　smile　on　his　hard　cheeks.　His　right　hand　held　Kaodee's　hand.

Kaodee's　was　also　thin，　and　because　of　this　her　thick　lips　were　better　to　look　upon.　There　were　many　smile　wrinkles　on　her　short　nose.　Her　hair　had　not　been　curled　and　there　was　no　lipstick　on　her　lips.　She　seemed　to　have　shaken　off　entirely　all　the　imfluences　of　Big　Red　Pepper　and　Meydee　and　—　without　any　make-up　—　to　reveal　her　real　self.　Her　head　was　also　held　high　as　though　she　were　looking　at　Old　Three's　cheeks　or　at　the　blue　sky.

As　they　rounded　the　spirit　screen　Old　There　shouted　in　a　loud　voice，　“Mother.”　His　voice　was　so　loud　that　Wang　the　Third　jumped.　Rey　Tang　had　not　intended　to　make　such　a　noise　but　had　shouted　involuntarily.　The　word　that　he　had　not　used　for　so　many　years　seemed　to　spring　out　of　itself.

“Old　Three，”　Rey　Shuan　also　shouted.　He　seemed　to　have　forgotten　for　the　moment　that　Little　Niu　Niu　was　dead.　Old　Three　was　the　representative　of　China's　youth　—　the　symbol　of　a　brave　and　vigorous　new　China.　When　Rey　Shuan　reached　them　he　also　recognized　Kaodee.　With　a　hand　for　each　he　drew　them　toward　him　and　the　hot　tears　went　round　and　round　in　his　eyes.

Sergeant　Pai　wanted　to　greet　Old　Three　but　seeing　that　Rey　Shuan　had　no　intention　of　letting　go　Old　Three's　hand　he　quietly　stepped　aside.　He　knew　that　when　people　of　one　family　come　together　again　they　do　not　want　strangers　to　intrude.　“Let's　go.”　Sergeant　Pai　was　drawing　Wang　the　Third　out　of　the　courtyard　as　he　spoke.

Old　Three's　voice　had　melted　the　ice　in　the　room.　Mrs.　Tien　Yiu　had　not　wept　the　whole　time　but　had　sat　there　in　a　stupor　looking　at　Niu　Niu.　When　she　heard　the　voice　of　Old　Three　her　heart　moved　with　such　a　movement　as　the　child　makes　in　its　mother's　womb.　Old　Three，　her　baby，　was　in　the　courtyard　calling　her.　She　was　alive　again　and　the　tears　that　had　been　held　back　so　long　suddenly　began　to　fall.　With　Old　Three　back　she　felt　that　she　did　not　have　to　watch　Niu　Niu　any　longer.　Niu　Niu　was　already　dead　but　her　own　son　was　alive.　The　tears　blinded　her　eyes　and　she　groped　her　way　out　of　the　room.

As　soon　as　she　came　out　of　the　room　Old　Three　let　go　his　brother's　hand　and　rushed　over　to　her.

Mrs.　Tien　Yiu　wept　aloud.　Old　Three　held　her　ice-cold　hands　and　called　“Mother，”　over　and　over.

Over　his　mother's　shoulder　he　saw　his　eldest　Sister-in-law，　“I've　come　back.”

Yun　Mei　did　not　turn　her　head　to　look　at　her　brother-in-law　but　threw　herself　on　Niu　Niu's　body　and　began　to　weep　aloud.

“What's　happened？　What's　happened？”　Old　Three　was　impatient　with　the　weeping　of　his　mother　and　his　sister-in-law.　Holding　his　mother's　hand　he　went　into　the　room　where　Yun　Mei　was.　With　one　glance　he　saw　the　little　bed.

When　Rey　Shuan　heard　his　mother　and　his　wife　weeping　he　felt　more　at　ease.　He　knew　that　weeping　was　the　best　means　for　getting　rid　of　sorrow.　He　decided　to　tell　his　grandfather　the　news　of　Old　Three's　return.

“Grandfather，　Grandfather，”　Rey　Shuan　called　in　a　hushed　voice.

The　old　man　seemed　to　be　asleep　and　grunted　without　opening　his　eyes.

“Grandfather，　Old　Three　has　come　back.”

“What？”　The　old　man's　eyes　were　still　shut.

“Old　Three　has　returned.”

The　old　man　opened　his　eyes.　“Little　Three，　my　Little　Three，　where　is　he？”　The　old　man　sat　up.　“Where　is　he？”　the　old　man　asked　impatiently.　Without　waiting　for　Rey　Shuan　to　answer　he　shouted，　“Little　Three，　Little　Three，　come　here.　I　want　to　see　you.”　Then　leaning　on　Rey　Shuan　he　started　out　of　the　room.　“To　come　back　and　not　come　first　to　see　your　grandfather！　What　a　child！”

When　Old　Three　saw　his　grandfather　he　suddenly　stood　still.　His　grandfather　was　no　longer　the　strong　and　healthy　grandfather　of　his　memory.　He　had　changed　to　a　thin，　weak，　bent，　old　man.　Not　only　his　hair　and　his　beard　were　white　but　even　his　eyebrows　were　all　white.

The　old　man　put　his　dried，　withered　hand　on　his　grandson's　shoulder，　and　said，　“Good，　good，　Little　Three，　you　are　even　taller　and　stronger.　Ah　—　you　have　been　away　for　eight　years　but　your　grandfather　waited　for　you.　Good，　now　I　am　easy　and　even　if　I　die　I　will　be　at　peace，　my　Little　Three　has　come　back.”

Mrs.　Tien　Yiu，　still　weeping，　came　out　into　the　courtyard.　She　walked　toward　her　son.

The　old　man　looked　at　his　daughter-in-law　and　sighed　and　then　very　gently　said，　“Don't　weep　any　more，　Little　Three　has　come　back　—　is　that　not　happiness？”

Mrs.　Tien　Yiu　nodded　and　wiped　the　tears　with　the　corner　of　her　coat.

The　old　man　saw　Kaodee　and　rubbed　his　old　eyes，　and　asked，　“Are　you　not　the　elder　daughter　of　the　Kuan　family？”

Kaodee　nodded.

“Did　you　come　with　Little　Three？”　The　old　man　had　no　use　for　any　of　the　Kuans　even　though　he　knew　that　Kaodee　was　better　behaved　than　Big　Red　Pepper　and　Meydee.

“That's　right，”　Kaodee　said　and　went　over　and　took　Mrs.　Tien　Yiu's　hand.

“Ah　—　”　The　old　man　did　not　want　to　make　Kaodee　unhappy　so　did　not　continue　to　question　her.

After　a　few　moments　the　old　man　called　Old　Three　into　his　own　room.　“Little　Three，　what　is　this　about　the　daughter　of　the　Kuan　family？”

Old　Three　without　any　hesitation　answered　directly，　“She　has　no　place　to　go.　She　wants　to　stay　here　for　a　few　days.”

“Oh　—　”　The　old　man　slowly　lay　down.　“Are　you　—　”

Old　Three　guessed　what　his　grandfather　meant.　“Maybe　—　”

The　old　man　did　not　say　anything　for　a　long　time　—　he　still　did　not　like　the　Kuan　family　no　matter　how　good　Kaodee　herself　was.

“Grandfather，　don't　you　want　more　people　in　the　family？”　Old　Three　said　and　smiled.

The　old　man　thought　awhile.　“What　you　say　is　right.”





