12


Useless　Fang　listened　to　Pao　Ching's　story　without　a　word.　When　Pao　Ching　had　finished,　he　stood　up　and　started　to　walk　away.

“Where　are　you　going,　elder　brother？"　asked　Pao　Ching,　pulling　on　his　brother's　sleeve.　Useless　Fang　turned　and　looked　at　him.　His　eyes　were　hard　and　resolute,　his　lips　trembling.　He　spoke　finally.

“This　is　my　affair.　Small　and　trivial　things　I　do　not　worry　about.　You　are　incapable　of　handling　big　matters,　but　I　can.　I　am　going　to　see　this　Commander　Wang,　and　tell　him　what　I　think　of　people　like　him.　He　needs　to　be　told　that　we　are　living　in　the　Republic　of　China,　that　the　day　is　past　when　human　beings　can　be　sold　like　slaves."　Useless　Fang　snapped　his　fingers.　“A　commander,　he　calls　himself.　Bah！Commanders　are　a　dime　a　dozen."　He　paused　and　his　thin　face　reddened.　“To　think　of　selling　a　lovely　young　girl　like　Lotus　Charm　to　an　old　man　past　fifty.　How　repulsive！"

Pao　Ching　laid　his　hand　on　his　brother's　shoulder.　“Please　lower　your　voice,"　he　urged.　“Someone　might　hear　—　a　friend　of　Wang.　Let　us　sit　down　again　and　discuss　the　matter　quietly."

Useless　Fang　sat　down.　“She　has　made　so　much　money　for　us　all,"　he　protested.　“We　must　not　sell　her.　No,　no！"

“I　haven't　said　I　want　to　do　such　a　thing,"　countered　Pao　Ching.　“I　merely　told　you　the　facts."

Useless　Fang　did　not　seem　to　have　heard.　“Go　ahead.　Talk.　Say　all　you　want.　I　cannot　beat　your　wife,　but　as　your　elder　brother　I　have　the　right　to　beat　you.　Think　twice　before　you　agree　with　that　wife　of　yours."

“Do　you　think　I　would　even　discuss　the　matter　with　you　if　I　agreed　with　her？"　Pao　Ching　was　indignant.　“I　am　determined　not　to　give　in."

“That's　fine.　You　speak　like　my　real　brother　and　I　am　proud　of　you.　We　must　remember　our　parents　were　worthy　and　we　must　follow　their　example.　It　is　no　disgrace　for　you　to　earn　your　living　as　an　entertainer,　but　we　should　not　be　men　if　we　agreed　to　sell　a　human　being　like　a　slave."

For　a　while　both　were　silent,　brooding.　Presently　Pao　Ching　spoke　his　fears.　“Elder　brother,"　he　said,　“do　you　realize　that　even　if　we　went　back　to　Chungking,　we　would　not　be　out　of　reach　of　that　man　Wang.　Fifteen　miles　is　nothing　in　these　days　of　the　motor　car."

“How　do　you　know　he　has　a　car？"

“I　don't,　but　he　is　a　war　lord.　If　we　go　back　to　Chungking,　he　might　order　the　local　gangsters　and　thugs　to　make　things　unpleasant　for　us.　Of　course　the　national　government　is　there,　but　they　cannot　bother　to　suppress　the　local　war　lords,　so　they　have　settled　with　them,　and　that　means　this　Wang　can　do　as　he　pleases.　We　shall　get　no　protection."

“So　you　are　going　to　give　him　Lotus　Charm？"　Useless　Fang's　eyes　were　full　of　reproach.

“No,　I　am　not,"　answered　Pao　Ching.　“But　I　want　to　point　out　that　we　can　neither　run　away　from　him　nor　offend　him.　We　must　compromise."

“How　can　you　compromise　with　a　man　like　that？"

“I　have　a　plan.　I　shall　make　a　personal　visit　to　pay　my　respects　to　him.　I　may　take　Lotus　Charm　along　and　she　will　kowtow　to　him,　to　show　our　respect.　If　he　is　a　man　of　intelligence　he　will　understand,　and　perhaps　he　will　give　us　his　blessing　and　protection.　If　he　gets　unpleasant,　then　I　will　be　unpleasant.　If　he　wants　to　fight,　then　I　will　fight.　What　do　you　think　of　that,　elder　brother？"

Useless　Fang　scratched　his　head.　It　sounded　better　to　him　that　Pao　Ching　should　fight　than　himself,　but　he　was　doubtful　of　his　brother's　logic.　“Tell　me,"　he　asked　dimly,　“on　what　pretext　will　you　make　this　visit　to　kowtow？"

“You　know　our　professional　motto.　One　is　polite　before　one　becomes　a　realist.　In　my　work　I　have　to　put　out　my　hand　for　a　living.　I　am　not　ashamed　to　kowtow　when　it　is　necessary.　After　all,　in　our　profession　we　kowtow　to　the　Gods　and　to　the　prince　of　hell.　So　why　not　to　a　war　lord？"　He　smiled　reminiscently.　“Remember　that　time　in　Tsingtao　when　the　Governor's　concubine　took　a　liking　to　me.　She　wanted　me　to　come　and　sing　in　her　private　quarters.　If　I　had　done　that　I　would　have　lost　my　head.　So　what　did　I　do？I　kowtowed　to　the　sergeant　who　brought　her　message.　He　was　flattered　and　impressed.　And　he　listened　to　my　story　with　an　open　heart.　I　told　him　that　I　lived　from　hand　to　mouth,　that　my　entire　family　depended　on　me　for　a　living,　and　that　I　could　not　afford　to　keep　the　engagement.　He　believed　me,　and　his　heart　was　touched,　so　he　let　me　go　a　free　man.　No,　I　am　not　ashamed　to　kowtow　when　it　is　a　means　to　an　end.　This　all　may　bring　good　luck　to　us.　But,　if　the　moment　arrives　when　my　kowtowing　is　wasted,　then　I　can　use　my　hand.　I　can　fight　with　the　rest,　fight　to　the　end　of　my　life."

“But　why　not　go　alone？Why　take　Lotus　Charm　with　you？"

“I　want　to　take　her　along　to　show　them　that　she　is　still　a　child,　not　developed　yet　into　a　woman　—　too　young　to　be　a　good　concubine."

“But　old　men　like　young　and　innocent　girls.　Experienced　women　make　too　many　demands."

Pao　Ching　didn't　answer　that.

“I　shall　come　with　you　then,"　said　Useless　Fang,　but　without　enthusiasm.

“There　is　no　need.　You　can　stay　at　home　and　look　after　your　sister_in_law."

“Look　after　her！"

“She　has　to　be　looked　after,　elder　brother."

Early　next　morning　after　Lotus　Charm　and　Pao　Ching　had　left　for　the　Wang　mansion　with　Sergeant　Tao,　Useless　Fang　began　his　task　of　looking　after　his　sister_in_law.　“So,"　he　accused　in　a　grim　sarcastic　voice,　“so　it　is　not　enough　that　you　make　this　innocent　child　a　public　entertainer,　but　now　you　want　to　sell　her　body.　Where　is　your　heart,　if　you　have　one？"

Mrs.　Fang　wanted　a　drink　before　she　answered.　But　Useless　Fang　saw　her　stretch　out　her　hand　for　the　bottle,　and　reached　for　it　himself.　He　threw　it　on　the　floor　where　it　broke　into　pieces.　Mrs.　Fang　was　shocked.　She　stood　like　a　statue,　her　dilated　eyes　fixed　on　Useless　Fang.　She　tried　to　speak,　but　couldn't.　Then　she　recovered　herself.　“I　brought　the　child　up　with　my　own　hands,　as　if　she　were　my　own.　I've　no　grudge　against　her.　But　I　know　girl　singers.　We　should　have　got　rid　of　her　early　and　made　ourselves　a　little　money,　and　she　would　be　happy　with　some　man.　She　needs　a　man.　If　we'd　done　that　—　all　of　us　would　be　happy.　You　say　I'm　wrong.　Well　—　from　now　on,　I　wash　my　hands　of　it　all.　I'll　have　nothing　to　do　with　the　girl.　Fresh　water　doesn't　mix　with　salt,　and　that's　to　the　good."

She　wagged　one　flabby　finger　at　Useless　Fang.

“But　you'll　be　sorry.　You　and　my　husband　are　spoiling　her.　If　she　doesn't　give　you　trouble,　just　come　and　dig　out　my　eyes.　I　know　life.　Her　destiny　under　the　stars　is　to　be　an　entertainer,　and　a　prostitute.　And　she'll　always　be　that　—　a　lowly　slut.　You　think　I　am　heartless.　Well,　let　me　tell　you　my　heart　is　made　the　same　way　as　yours,　but　my　eyes　are　sharper.　I　know　this　girl　can't　get　away　from　her　stars　—　no　other　girl　entertainer　ever　did.　That's　all　I　have　to　say.　From　now　on　I　shut　up."

Useless　Fang　became　conciliatory.　“If　we　have　patience　we　can　teach　her,"　he　said.　“She　learns　her　songs　quickly.　So　she　can　learn　other　things　too."

“No　one　can　change　a　person's　destiny　that　is　ruled　by　the　stars,"　said　Mrs.　Fang　stolidly.　“Have　you　ever　noticed　how　she　walks　—　wagging　her　hips　to　attract　men.　She　doesn't　know　it,　perhaps,　but　it　comes　out　—　her　profession."

“That　is　a　stage　habit,　and　she　learned　it　as　a　child.　She　does　not　do　it　intentionally.　I　am　sure　of　that."

Mrs.　Fang　smiled.　“Let's　have　a　drink,"　she　proposed.　“A　drink　makes　you　forget　everything.　Why　worry　about　other　when　you　can　drink."　But　she　was　taking　to　herself.　Useless　Fang　had　walked　out.

Pao　Ching,　Lotus　Charm,　and　Sergeant　Tao　were　on　their　way,　in　litters　provided　by　Commander　Wang.　Lotus　Charm　was　deep　in　thought.　She　felt　she　was　going　into　danger,　but　she　did　not　know　exactly　what　she　was　facing.　This　journey　had　a　solemn　portent,　she　was　sure.　She　felt　as　if　she　were　enduring　the　horrors　of　an　air　raid.　You　heard　the　bombs　shriek,　and　you　never　knew　where　they　struck.　You　saw　people　lying　dead,　but　you　never　saw　them　die.　And　there　was　doubt　and　weariness.　She　was　tired　now,　and　she　felt　shrunken　like　a　withered_up　bean.　And　then　realism　would　come.　She　would　move　her　legs　and　she　felt　old　and　mature.　Her　body　seemed　to　have　swelled　into　a　strange　and　unfamiliar　ripeness,　and　little　pulses　she　had　not　noticed　before　began　to　beat　in　strange　places　of　her　body.　And　in　her　heart　the　words　came　that　someone　wanted　her　for　a　concubine.　A　concubine　.　.　.　a　grown　woman.

Perhaps　it　wasn't　so　bad　after　all.　Then　she　corrected　herself.　To　be　a　concubine　was　a　lowly　occupation.　It　meant　losing　face,　being　an　old　man's　plaything.　But　really　it　meant　being　only　one　of　a　few　little　wives.　She　was　little,　after　all.　And　she　would　have　to　sleep　with　a　man　over　fifty.　How　little　she　was,　and　how　big　he　must　be.　So　big　he　would　hurt　her.　She　could　already　feel　his　hands　on　her　secret　parts,　and　surely　he　would　have　rough　whiskers　which　would　tear　her　flesh.　The　more　she　thought　of　it,　the　more　terrified　she　became.　Perhaps　she　could　kill　herself　before　this　dreadful　thing　happened.

And　would　she　be　able　to　keep　on　collecting　stamps？She　wanted　a　ten_cent　Hong_Kong　stamp　so　badly.　Perhaps　old　Wang　would　get　her　one？

Ahead　was　a　mighty　forest,　tall　trees　close　together　blocking　out　the　view.　There　was　the　house,　the　great　mansion　to　which　she　was　being　delivered　like　a　chicken　for　sale.　And　there　lived　the　old　man　with　the　lusting　eyes,　the　coarse　beard.　If　she　could　only　fly　away　like　a　bird.　But　she　was　helpless.　Her　heart　was　weeping　although　her　eyes　were　dry.

The　litter　seemed　to　have　slowed　up.　She　wanted　it　to　go　faster.　The　sooner　all　this　was　over,　the　better.　Resolutely　she　fought　back　her　tears.　She　did　not　want　her　father　to　see　her　weeping.

Pao　Ching　had　given　her　instructions　how　to　dress　—　to　look　like　a　little　girl.　She　wore　an　old　plain　blue　gown　without　trimming,　old　satin　slippers,　and　no　ribbons　on　her　braids.　Blue　string　instead.　She　had　put　on　no　make-up.　She　looked　at　herself　in　the　mirror　in　her　pocketbook.　Her　mouth　was　thin　and　pinched;　and　she　looked　plain　and　ordinary.　Why　did　men　want　her？She　was　so　little　and　ordinary.　Her　mother　must　be　right.　“Only　that　bottom　of　yours　is　worth　anything."　She　blushed　at　the　thought,　and　jabbed　the　mirror　back　in　her　pocketbook.

The　litter　stopped　suddenly.　They　were　in　a　clearing　in　front　of　a　huge　mansion.　Lotus　Charm　stepped　out　quickly.　For　an　instant　she　stopped　to　look　at　the　sky.　Somewhere　a　bird　was　singing　and　the　trees　were　a　delicious　green.　The　cool　air　caressed　her　face.　Everything　was　so　beautiful,　and　yet　she　was　going　into　a　hideous　gray　nightmare　—　to　be　sold　to　an　old　man.

She　looked　at　her　father's　pallid　face.　He　had　changed.　She　sensed　how　nervous　he　was,　but　she　noticed　that　his　thick　eyebrows　were　up.　That　meant　he　was　going　to　fight.　Whenever　her　father's　eyebrows　were　up　like　that　,　she　knew　he　was　determined　to　win.　She　felt　cheered.

They　walked　through　a　vast　garden,　past　an　artificial　miniature　mountain　topped　by　a　tiny　pavilion.　There　were　beautifully　kept　lawns　and　great　banks　of　flowers.　Butterflies　hovered　over　the　borders,　some　of　which　were　filled　with　tall　red　flowers,　others　crowded　with　pure　white　blossoms.　And　she　smelt　the　perfume　of　the　garden　in　the　soft　wind.　Although　she　loved　flowers　she　did　not　want　to　look　at　these.　Flowers　and　torture　did　not　go　well　together.　And　sometimes　when　she　came　to　a　flower　bed　more　beautiful　than　the　others,　her　heart　stood　still.　The　flowers　were　mocking　her.　The　red　flowers　especially.　They　reminded　her　of　blood.　She　moved　closer　to　her　father　for　protection.　Her　fists　were　tight　white　balls,　her　fingers　so　taut　that　they　felt　as　if　they　would　crack　any　moment.

The　sergeant　conducted　them　to　an　ornate　sitting　room.　Neither　of　them　sat　down.　They　were　too　tense.　Pao　Ching　had　a　set　smile　on　his　face,　under　his　lifted　eyebrows.　A　muscle　was　twitching　on　the　side　of　his　face,　and　he　held　himself　stiff　and　erect.　Lotus　Charm　stood　at　his　side,　her　head　lowered,　her　upper　teeth　biting　her　lower　lip,　which　had　begun　to　tremble.

The　minutes　dragged.　They　seemed　to　be　waiting　interminably.　Pao　Ching　wanted　to　scratch　his　head,　but　he　didn't　like　to,　in　case　the　war　lord　arrived　unexpectedly　and　caught　him　at　a　disadvantage.　In　his　mind　he　was　going　over　the　things　he　intended　to　say.　His　plan　was　to　kneel　the　moment　Commander　Wang　made　an　appearance,　and　then　go　right　into　his　story.　He　knew　it　all　by　heart.

There　was　a　noise　outside　—　a　rustle.　Lotus　Charm　gave　a　little　cry　and　moved　closer　to　her　father.

“Ssh,"　he　cautioned.　“Don't　be　afraid."　The　muscle　on　his　face　was　twitching　faster.

Sergeant　Tao　entered.　With　him　came　no　dashing　Commander　Wang,　but　an　old　Chinese　lady　in　a　black　silk　dress,　leaning　on　his　arm.　In　her　hand　she　carried　a　water　pipe.　Pao　Ching　took　quick　notice　of　the　shrunken　face,　the　large　mouth　and　flat　head.　A　typical　Szechwan　woman.

Sergeant　Tao　said　briefly,　“Madame　Commander　—　Boss　Fang."　Pao　Ching　was　momentarily　at　a　loss.　He　had　expected　to　meet　a　man,　and　here　was　a　woman.　Everything　he　had　planned　in　his　mind　vanished.　Madame　Commander　looked　with　great　care　at　Lotus　Charm.　She　put　a　light　to　her　pipe　and　smoked　noisily.

Now　what,　Pao　Ching　asked　himself　desperately.　He　could　not　kowtow　to　a　woman,　however　high　her　position,　not　even　to　save　Lotus　Charm.　A　thought　came.　He　tugged　at　Lotus　Charm's　sleeve.　She　knew　the　signal.　Slowly　she　went　down　on　her　knees　before　the　old　woman　—　and　kowtowed.

Madame　Commander　gave　three　loud　puffs　at　the　pipe.　Three　times　she　threw　the　ashes　on　the　ground　in　front　of　Lotus　Charm.　Lotus　Charm　kept　her　head　bowed.　She　saw　the　ashes　on　the　ground　through　windows　of　her　tears.

Pao　Ching　watched　and　wondered.　How　could　he　begin？He　saw　the　old　lady　rubbing　the　bowl　of　her　pipe　with　her　hand.　Just　then　Lotus　Charm　sobbed.

Madame　Commander　looked　coldly　at　Pao　Ching,　her　small　black　eyes　boring　into　his.　“What's　the　matter？"　she　asked　in　Szechwan　dialect.　“What　goes　on　here？"

Pao　Ching　couldn't　answer.　Sergeant　Tao　was　wagging　his　head　slowly,　an　expression　of　disgust　on　his　face.

“I　spoke,"　said　Madame　Commander,　“but　no　one　answers.　I　said,　what　goes　on？I　say　now,　how　does　it　happen　that　such　a　little　girl　wants　to　be　a　concubine？Tell　me！"　She　frowned　at　Pao　Ching;　and　his　face　went　crimson.

Finally　he　found　his　tongue.　“Commander　Wang　wants　—　"

She　cut　him　short　with　a　shrill　demand.　“Commander　Wang　wants　what？"　She　paused,　her　mouth　pursed,　and　then　cracked　out　like　a　whip,　“If　you　hadn't　tempted　him,　the　commander　wouldn't　have　given　her　a　second　thought."

Lotus　Charm　sprang　up.　She　turned　her　tear-stained　face　up　to　the　old　woman,　and　shrieked,　“I　tempt　him.　I　.　.　.　never."

“Lotus　Charm,"　commanded　Pao　Ching　sharply,　“remember　your　manners."

But　to　his　surprise　Madame　Commander　was　laughing.　“Commander　Wang　is　a　good　man."　She　looked　across　at　Sergeant　Tao.　“Yes,　sergeant."　The　sergeant　grinned.

“And　we　are　good　people　too,　madame,"　asserted　Pao　Ching　politely.

Madame　Commander　contemplated　her　water　pipe.　She　accepted　a　lighter　from　the　sergeant　and　lit　the　noisy　bubbling　thing.　She　spoke　to　Pao　Ching,　“Well　spoken.　And　remember,　no　one　can　look　down　on　you　if　you　do　not　humble　yourself."　Then　in　a　loud　voice　she　said,　“Sergeant　Tao,　take　them　both　home."　Her　pipe　was　out　again.　She　kindled　her　lighter　and　put　it　to　the　tobacco.

She　seemed　to　have　forgotten　them.　Pao　Ching　was　overwhelmed.　This　woman　had　a　heart.　She　was　understanding.　She　was　a　great　person,　but　she　seemed　to　have　withdrawn　herself.

Sergeant　Tao　broke　the　silence.　“Madame　Commander,"　he　said,　“they　want　to　thank　you."　By　way　of　answer　Madame　Commander　made　a　circle　in　the　air　with　her　glowing　pipe　lighter　—　a　signal　they　were　to　leave,　that　she　did　not　want　to　be　thanked.

Pao　Ching　bowed　low　from　the　waist,　and　Lotus　Charm　did　likewise.

And　then　they　were　outside　in　the　garden.　This　time　it　seemed　as　if　they　were　in　Heaven.　This　was　freedom　under　the　clear　sky.　The　flowers　were　lovelier　than　ever,　a　vast　pattern　of　festival　color.　Lotus　Charm　wanted　to　dance　and　to　sing.　When　a　small　yellow　butterfly　fluttered　past　her　face,　she　cried　out　with　joy.

Sergeant　Tao　was　smiling　too.　At　the　gate　Pao　Ching　asked,“Fellow　northerner,　what　does　all　this　mean？I　don't　understand."

Sergeant　Tao　grinned.　“when　the　commmander　wants　a　concubine,　he　has　to　get　the　approval　of　Madame　Commander.　She　can't　stop　him　having　women,　but　she　likes　to　see　that　he　gets　the　best.　She　doesn't　want　him　to　have　any　girl.　Particularly　one　who　would　infringe　on　her　position　as　his　chief　wife　and　mistress　of　the　mansion.　She's　smart,　she　is.　She　knows　she's　old　and　no　good　for　the　bed,　but　she　can　still　rule　the　house."　He　chuckled.　“She　was　impressed　when　your　daughter　stood　up　and　spoke　for　herself.　That　settled　it.　Madame　Commander　doesn't　want　any　independent-spirited　girls　in　her　house.　Now　you　can　go　home　and　not　worry　any　more.　But　it　wouldn't　be　a　bad　idea　if　you　sent　a　present　to　the　commander　just　to　keep　him　sweet."

“But　what　shall　I　send　him？"

Sergeant　Tao　made　a　ring　with　his　thumb　and　finger.　“Just　something."

“How　much？"　persisted　Pao　Ching.

“The　more　the　better.　Even　a　little　is　all　right."　The　sergeant　made　a　ring　with　his　fingers　again.　“When　the　commander　sees　money　he'll　forget　about　women."

Pao　Ching　thanked　Sergeant　Tao.　“When　you　come　to　town,　please　honor　us　by　taking　tea,"　he　said.　“And　be　sure　I　shall　not　allow　you　to　render　me　this　service　without　doing　something　in　return."

The　sergeant　was　pleased.　He　bowed　and　grasped　Pao　Ching's　hand　warmly.　“Anything　you　say,　fellow　northerner.　A　pleasure　to　have　been　of　such　small　service　to　you."

Lotus　Charm　was　looking　happily　over　the　lovely　landscape.　The　thick　woods,　the　rice　fields,　and　the　water　buffaloes　composed　themselves　in　a　striking　picture.　Everything　was　green,　everything　was　happy,　and　she　was　free.

She　thanked　the　sergeant　too,　a　warm　bright　child　smile　on　her　face.　Then　she　and　her　father　walked　slowly　down　the　hill,　out　of　the　great　forest.　Pao　Ching　sighed.　“So　now　that　he　is　not　buying　you,　we　have　to　buy　him.　We　must　give　him　a　present."

“And　money　isn't　easy　to　come　by,　either,"　said　Lotus　Charm.　“How　can　we　give　him　money　when　he　does　nothing　in　return？"

“But　we　must　do　it.　If　we　don't　please　him,　he　may　make　trouble　seeing　that　he　has　not　taken　you.　As　long　as　we　make　it　we　can　give　him　something.　I'm　glad　the　matter　is　settled.　I　never　imagined　it　would　pass　off　so　easily."　He　laid　his　hand　on　her　shoulder.　“And　you　played　your　part　nobly.　I　know　that　you　had　to　swallow　your　pride　to　kneel　down　to　that　old　woman.　But　remember　what　she　said:`No　one　can　look　down　on　you　if　you　do　not　humble　yourself.'　That　was　good.　Always　remember　it.　Those　words　are　worth　millions　of　dollars."

Lotus　Charm　was　thinking.　She　did　not　answer　for　a　while.　Then　she　said,　“Father,　don't　worry　about　me.　I　didn't　mind　kneeling　down.　It　made　me　feel　grown-up.　I　am　getting　old　fast　now,　and　I　can　fight　for　myself.　You　know,　if　that　old　man　really　had　taken　me　for　a　concubine　I　would　have　bitten　his　ears　off.　I　would　too."

Pao　Ching　was　shocked.　“Be　not　so　sure,　little　girl,　and　never　be　proud,"　he　admonished.　“Life　is　full　of　difficulties,　and　there　are　dangers　on　all　sides.　Let　us　remember　those　words　—　`No　one　can　look　down　on　you　if　you　do　not　humble　yourself.'　We　might　write　them　in　a　ballad　and　sing　it."

They　got　into　the　litters　that　had　been　following　them.　When　they　were　halfway　down　the　hill　they　came　upon　Useless　Fang　waiting　for　them.　They　got　down　and　walked　again,　and　told　him　the　whole　story.

When　Pao　Ching　had　finished　Useless　Fang　halted　in　the　middle　of　the　road.　“Little　Lotus,"　he　cried,　“stand　still.　I　must　take　a　good　look　at　you."　Lotus　obeyed,　wondering　if　her　uncle　were　a　little　mad.　For　a　long　time　he　looked　at　her.　His　eyes　ran　up　and　down　her　figure　like　caressing　fingers.　Then　he　said　with　a　laugh　in　his　voice,　“My　little　Lotus　—　you　are　just　right.　You　are　like　a　child,　but　you　are　grown-up　at　the　same　time.　Always　be　like　you　are　today,　and　keep　your　stubborn　temperament.　Then　you　will　never　be　a　fallen　woman,　even　if　you　are　a　drum　singer."

Lotus　Charm　wanted　to　cry　again,　for　no　reason　at　all.





