First　Act,　First　Scene


Time:　last　years　of　the　Manchu　dynasty,　when　railways　were　not　built　yet　in　China　at　that　time　the　boxers　with　their　training,　education　and　connections　could　convey　precious　cargo　from　one　place　to　another　and　thus　make　a　living.　Wang　Ta-ch'eng　is　one　of　these　men.

Summer　morning　in　Peking.

Place:　Wang　Ta-ch'eng's　home—an　oblong　courtyard,　the　ground　is　very　even,　it　almost　like　a　tennis　court　it　is　so　even　and　so　shaped.

Stage　Setting:　Facing　the　audience　the　objects　or　furniture　is　placed:　back　right　hand　corner　is　visible　one　room　of　Wang　Ta-ch'eng's　house,　a　paper　window　and　door　are　visible　to　the　audience.　Above　the　paper　window　is　a　small　glass　window.　Right　next　to　the　room　there　is　the　wall　that　continues　from　the　courtyard　all　along　the　back　of　the　stage.　There　are　morning　glories　over　the　wall.　Ovre　the　wall,　in　the　distance,　one　can　see　the　towers　with　yellow　tiles.

In　front　of　the　wall　visible　to　the　audience,　stands　a　big　wooden　stand　where　Wang　Ta-ch'eng　and　his　pupils　put　their　spears　with　red　tassels　and　swords　in　green　sheaths.　Ting　Te-sheng　is　sitting　in　front　of　the　stand　and　very　carefully　cleaning　a　sword.　Right　next　to　the　room　there　is　a　very　narrow　wooden　bench.　Wang　Shih-mei,　the　young　girl　is　lying　on　it　to　train　her　back　to　keep　balance.

At　the　extreme　left,　next　to　the　wall,　is　a　door　leading　to　the　street.

Very　near　the　end　of　the　stage　and　almost　on　the　same　line　with　the　door　there　is　a　big　willow　tree.　On　the　tree　Master　Wang's　short　white　cotton　jacket　is　hanging,　under　the　tree　there　is　a　low　table　on　which　there　are　tea　cups　and　teapot　and　long　pipe.　Wang　Ta-ch'eng　is　sitting　on　a　very　low　stool　behind　the　table,　facing　the　right　side　of　the　stage,　watching　his　daughter　and　sipping　tea.

Characters:　Wang　Ta-ch'eng,　Ting　Te-sheng,　Li　Chan-yuan,　Wang　Shih-mei,　Mrs.　Wang,　Sung　Ming-liang,　Ch'en　Hsiang-wu.

Curtain

Wang　Ta-ch'eng,　wearing　a　sleeveless　white　grass　linen　vest　and　loose　black　silk　trousers　tied　in　with　a　broad　cotton　braided　belt.　He　is　sitting　on　a　stool　beside　the　tea　table　watching　his　daughter　and　his　two　pupils.　Ting　Te-sheng　stripped　down　to　the　waist,　pigtails　wound　around　his　head,　very　absorbed　in　cleaning　the　sword　in　his　hands.

Li　Chan-yuan,　wearing　a　vest　and　black　silk　pants　practising　back　and　forth　on　the　stage　his　leg　exercises　which　are　so　important　in　Chinese　boxing.　As　soon　as　he　approaches　Wang,　the　teacher,　his　movements　are　swifter　and　his　silk　pants　rustle....

Wang　Shih-mei,　wearing　an　embroidered　stomach　covering　and　light　green　trousers.　Occasionally　she　turns　her　head　to　glance　at　her　father　and　when　her　father　was　not　watching　her　she　would　relax.　She　has　several　pigtails　tied　with　different　color　threads.

WTC:　（seeing　Niu-niu　relaxing）　Niu-niu.

WSM:　（quickly　straightening　out　on　the　bench）I　did　not　move！

WTC:　Be　a　good　girl,　don't　move.（turns　to　look　at　Li　Chan-yuan　and　slowly　stands　up）　Chan-yuan,　your　legs　should　be　at　right　angles　to　your　body,　not　too　high.

Mrs.　W:　（in　the　room）　Niu-niu！

WSM:　（quickly　rolling　down　from　the　bench）　Ma！

WTC:　（diverts　his　attention　from　the　pupils　and　quickly　turns　to　the　daughter）　What,　lie　down　again！

WSM:　（holding　one　of　her　pigtails）　Mother　is　calling　me.

WTC:　（shoving　her）　Go　lie　dlown　again,　do　what　I　say！

Mrs.　W:　（coming　out　of　the　room,　wears　a　white　cotton　trousers　and　jacket　with　sleeves　and　drying　her　hands　with　the　front　of　the　jacket）Niu-niu　come　here,　go　and　get　some　wheat　cakes　（shao　ping）　and　get　piping　hot　ones　not　cold.　Test　each　one　of　them　with　your　hand　make　sure　they　are　hot.　Understand？　（fumbles　in　her　jacket　pocket）

WTC:　（displeased）　Look　here,　we　are　doing　our　exercises,　why　don't　you　go　and　get　the　cakes　yourself.

Mrs.W:　（slightly　annoyed）I？　If　I　go　and　get　the　cakes　who　will　look　after　our　rice　porridge？

（while　Mr.　and　Mrs.　Wang　are　talking,　Li　Chan-yuan　comes　over　to　the　table　and　quickly　drank　a　cup　of　tea　which　he　filled　up　immediately.　Ting　Te-sheng　looks　sternly　at　Li　who　has　a　self-satisfied　expression　on　his　face.　Pleased　with　himself　still　more,　Li　squats　under　the　willow　trees　for　a　rest）

WTC:　Why　don't　you　get　the　cakes　after　the　rice　porridge　is　cooked？

Mrs.W:　（half　offended,　half　smiling）That's　fine,　that's　fine,as　soon　as　the　porridge　is　cooked,　you　all　hungry　devils　want　to　have　the　wheat　cakes　with　your　meal.　When　do　I　have　time　to　get　the　cakes？　（Mrs.　W　is　not　really　angry　but　she　raises　her　voice）　I　have　only　two　hands　and　two　legs,　and　I　have　to　make　the　tea,　cook　the　porridge　and　now　I　have　to　buy　the　wheat　cakes.　I　am　only　human,　how　can　I　do　all　these　things　at　once？

WTC:　（trying　to　control　his　temper　to　reason　out　with　his　wife）　I　know　you　are　a　busy　person　but　we　are　taking　our　exercises　which　is　very　important.　You　know,　if　we　don't　exercise　how　shall　we　make　a　living.

LTTC　（afraid　that　there　will　be　a　family　scene,　stands　up　rigidly）　Mrs.　Wang,　I　will　be　glad　to　get　the　cakes.

Mrs.　W:　（looking　at　TC　but　does　not　have　a　feeling　of　confidence　as　he　is　rather　stupid）　You？　You　are　not　even　as　capable　as　my　daughter,　I　would　be　surprised　if　you　would　not　get　five　old　left-over　cakes　out　of　ten　that　I　want　you　to　buy.

TTS:　（not　daring　to　contradict　Mrs.　W　yet　not　wishing　to　realise　that　he　that　stupid）　Oh,　I　am　not　just　a　pail　of　rice....

LCY:　（coming　over　to　join　the　others）　Mrs.　Wang,　I'll　go　and　get　the　cakes.

WTC:　No,you　go　and　practise　your　exercises.

Mrs.　W:　Heng！　I　know　you　are　clever,　but　you　are　a　bit　too　clever.　You　are　sure　to　come　back　with　only　five　cakes　if　I　would　ask　you　to　get　ten...you...gourmet....

WTC:　Alright,　alright,　I　will　go　and　buy　the　cakes　myself　when　we　are　through　with　our　exercises.　Niu-niu　go　and　lie　down　again,　Chan-yuan　practise　your　lessons.　Te-sheng...（but　Te-sheng　did　not　wait　for　his　master　to　finish　the　sentence　and　rushed　back　to　continue　cleaning　his　sword）

WSM:　（not　wishing　to　go　and　lie　on　the　bench　again）　Ma,　I　will　go　and　get　the　cakes　first　and　then　I　will　come　and　lie　on　the　bench　again.　I　am　a　good　buyer　and　I　don't　eat　them　without　your　permission.

Mrs.　W:　That's　right,　darling.　I　will　get　you　a　shopping　kerchief　to　carry　the　cakes　because　they　are　too　hot.

（Chan-yuan　losing　hope　of　being　sent　for　the　cakes,　goes　back　to　his　practise　but　his　exercises　are　not　as　vigorous　as　at　first）

WTC:　Wait　a　minute,　you　must　not　spoil　the　girl　so.　She　has　been　lying　on　the　bench　only　one　half　an　hour,　if　you　let　her　go　now,　why　should　we　bother　to　teach　her　boxing.（reflecting　on　his　past,　Wang　the　master　is　filled　with　pride）　When　I　was　young,　I　could　sleep　on　a　pole,　（and　points　to　a　spear）　which　is　not　much　wider　than　that　spear.　That's　why,　that's　why　I　am　what　I　am　today！

Mrs.　W:　Now　don't　start　about　your　past　and　your　youth,　I　have　never　seen　you　then　and　I　don't　know　and　what's　more,　you　are　a　man.　Really　I　don't　understand　why　you　should　train　this　little　girl　like　that.　She　is　a　girl！

（during　the　conversation.　Li　Chan-yuan　stopped　practising　and　sneaked　another　cup　of　tea.　Standing　up　he　put　his　foot　against　the　tree　and　bends　his　head）

WTC:　（rather　sarcastically）Well,　had　you　given　me　a　son,　I　would　not　waste　my　time　on　this　girl.　Am　I　crazy　to　waste　my　time　on　her？

Mrs.　W:　（getting　angry）　Oh,　you　blame　me　for　not　giving　you　a　son！　Don't　you　realise　that　it　is　not　my　work　alone　and　my　fault　alone？

WTC:　（at　a　loss　for　words）　Ah！　（pensively）

Mrs.　W:　What？

WTC:　Anyhow,　you　have　more　faults　than　I.

Mrs.　W:　I　know　what　you　have　on　your　mind....

WTC:　Don't　talk　nonsense.

Mrs.　W:　Nonsense？　You　think　I　don't　know　what　ails　you.　You've　told　me　many　times　that　you　want　to　have　a　son,　I　am　not　a　fool,　I　get　your　hints　....　Let's　be　quite　frank,　don't　you　really　want　a　concubine？

WTC:　（not　really　angry,　but　rather　taken　aback　by　surprise）　I？　Want　a　concubine？　I　am　a　boxer,　I　must　take　care　of　my　physique,　how　can　I　...

Mrs.　W　:Heng！　boxer,　boxers　usually　have　a　lot　of　concubines....

WTC:　（gets　angry）　You　are　just　looking　for　a　chance　to　pick　up　a　quarrel　....　I　tell　you　if　you　don't　like　to　live　here,　say　so　right　now,　let's　separate　....

Mrs.　W　（triumphantly）　Did　not　I　tell　you？　I　am　sure　right　after　we　separate,　you　will　get　yourself　a　young,　pretty　maid.

WTC:　（stamping　his　foot）　Hei！　（grealy　annoyed）

WSM:　（afraid　of　a　serious　family　scene）　Ma,　do　we　want　to　get　the　cakes　or　not？

TTS:　（trying　to　pacify）　Well,　Mrs.　Wang,　please　spare　me.　...

Mrs.　W:　Spare　you？　Your　kind　is　a　dime　a　dozen　....

TTS:　（laughed　foolishly）If　you　have　no　son,　why　don't　take　me　as　your　son？

WTC:　Hemm　...　（in　desperation　went　back　to　the　tree　and　is　watching　Li　Chan-yuan　doing　his　exercise　at　the　tree）

Mrs.　W:　You　want　to　be　my　son.　I　cannot　afford　to　have　a　son　like　you—every　day　you　eat　a　big　pot　of　noodles　and　a　whole　stock　of　rice....

TTS:　Please,　please　spare　me　....

WTC:　Te-sheng,　shut　up！

TTS:　（rubbing　his　hands）　Well　....

Mrs.　W:　（taking　her　daughter's　hand）　Niu-niu,　let's　go.　We　women　are　not　wanted　here.　I　really　had　quite　enough　of　it.　Every　day　from　sunrise　to　sundown　I　cook　and　cook　and　cook.　No　matter　how　much　I　prepare　everything　is　eaten　up.　This　banch　of　hungry　wolves　with　bottomless　stomaches！　Every　day　from　the　early　morning　I　wash　and　wash　the　clothes,　no　matter　how　quickly　I　wash　the　clothes,　they　are　just　as　quickly　soiled　with　perspiration,　a　bunch　of　smelly　eggs　...　Come,　Niu-niu,　I'm　going　to　have　a　holiday　for　a　couple　of　days.　（Mother　and　daughter　about　to　exit）

WTC:　Where　are　you　going？

Mrs.　W:　My　legs　are　mine,　I　can　go　where　I　like.

TTS:　（quickly　stood　up）　Mrs.　Wang.　（trying　to　stop　her）

Mrs.　W:　（still　walking　on　towards　the　door）　You　go　and　look　after　the　porridge.　（goes　out）

TTS:　Ya,　ya　....　（and　he　goes　into　the　room）

WTC:　（seeing　that　the　women　are　out　of　sights,　he　sighs.　Sits　down　and　looks　at　his　fists　and　then　shakes　his　head）

LCY:　（stopped　his　leg　exercise,　smiled　slyly）Never　mind,　teacher,　I'm　sure　Mrs.　Wang　is　just　gone　to　buy　the　cakes.　She　will　be　back　in　a　moment.　Women　are　just　like　this　....　The　farthest　place　she　can　go　is　the　pastry　shop.

WTC:　（stared　sternly）You,　young　fellow,　have　no　heart.　To　tell　you　the　truth　Mrs.　Wang　does　not　really　have　an　easy　life—all　the　365　days　of　the　year　she　works　hard.

LCY:　（to　ingratiate　himself）Yes,　I　know　I　know　but　I　also　know　that　you　work　even　harder.　Every　day　you　have　so　much　trouble　with　our　stupid　geese　and　whenever　you　have　to　convey　a　cargo　you　suffer　from　hunger,　thirst,　and　nothing,　not　even　a　mountain　of　knives　would　stop　you　on　the　way.　That　is　what　I　call　hard　work.　Women　are　tyrants　at　home　only.　As　soon　as　they　step　outside　and　see　a　Pekinese　dog　bark　at　them　twice　they　run　home　immediately.

WTC:　（half　annoyed,　half　pleased）　Oh,　is　that　how　you　regard　women.　You　wait　and　see,　when　you　will　get　married,　you　will　understand　them　better.　Believe　me,　fists　are　not　much　use　when　you　deal　with　a　woman.

SML:　（outside　the　door）　Mr.　Wang,　Master　Wang.　Are　you　up　yet？

WTC:　（stands　up　quickly）　Yes,　I　am　up.　（in　the　meantime　he　takes　the　jacket　off　the　tree　and　puts　it　on）（tells　Li　Chan-yuan　in　a　low　voice）　Put　on　your　jacket,　Mr.　Sung　is　here.　（pulls　down　his　jacket　and　straightens　out　his　pants　and　goes　towards　the　door）　Mr.　Sung,　please　come　in.　We've　up　for　hours.　We've　been　exercising.

SML:　（coming　in,　dressed　in　an　old　blue　cotton　coat.　He　is　refined　and　intelligent　looking　in　spite　of　his　clothes）　Master　Wang,　I　hope　I　am　not　intruding.

WTC:　（respectfully　but　friendly）　Not　in　the　least.　Chan-yuan,　get　a　chair　for　Mr.　Sung.　Pull　down　your　pigtail.　（Chan-yuan　puts　down　his　pigtail　and　quickly　goes　into　the　room　to　get　a　chair）

（to　Sung）　We　are　boxers,　we　don't　always　know　good　manners.　（in　reference　to　Chan-yuan）　（to　Chan-yuan　in　the　room）　Quickly,　Mr.　Sung　is　standing　here.

SML:　Don't　stand　on　ceremonies,　Master　Wang.

WTC:　This　is　not　ceremony,　it　is　just　our　etiquette.　We　must　keep　up　the　politeness　otherwise　in　our　profession　we　would　soon　become　savages　without　it.　（laughs,　probably　thinking　that　his　words　were　so　smart）　（Chan-yuan　is　back　with　the　chair）.　（Master　Wang　took　the　chair　from　LCY　and　puts　it　down　for　Mr.　Sung）　Please,　Mr.　Sung,　be　seated.（to　Chan-yuan）　pour　some　tea.　（Chan-yuan　pours　but　Mr.　Wang　offers　the　tea　cup　to　the　guest　himself）　Please,　Mr.　Sung,　have　some　tea.

（to　Chan-yuan）　Go　and　get　some　cakes,　（shouts　to　Te-sheng　in　the　room）　Te_sheng,is　the　porridge　alright？　Bring　me　two　bowls　to　cool　them　so　that　when　the　cakes　are　here,　we　can　have　the　cooled　porridge　with　the　cakes.

（to　Mr.　Sung）　I　have　nothing　good　to　offer　you,　only　poor　millet　porridge　and　salted　vegetables.

SML:　I　hesitate　to　come　as　often　as　I　would　like　because　you　are　always　so　extremely　polite.

WTC:　Oh,　come,　come,　we　are　old　neighbors　and　we　are　also　old　friends.　We　uneducated　folks　would　be　only　too　glad　with　you　learned　people.　Your　words　always　open　up　my　mind　and　make　me　see　things　which　I　have　never　seen　before.　You　learned　people　have　seven　holes　in　your　heart　but　we　poor　illiterates　have　only　one　and　even　that　one　is　filled　with　mud.　（he　laughs）　（looks　at　Chan-yuan）　You　are　still　here？　Did　not　I　send　you　to　buy　cakes？

LCY：　（puts　his　hand　into　his　pocket,　to　hint　that　he　has　no　money）　I'm　going,　I'm　going.　（but　still　puts　his　hand　in　his　pocket）　Only　cakes,　nothing　else？

WTC:　Do　you　think　you　will　buy　a　house　also？　（Mr.　Wang　puts　his　hand　into　his　pocket　and　finding　it　empty　feels　very　embarrassed　and　hinting　to　Chan-yuan　calls）　Te-sheng,　Te-sheng.　（Te-sheng,　holding　two　bowls　comes　out　of　the　room）　Yes,　I　am　here.

（Li　Chan-yuan　walks　towards　Te-sheng　and　whispers　...　）

TTS:　（in　a　loud　voice）　When　did　you　see　me　having　money？

LCY:　（making　a　gesture　to　be　quiet）　Mr.　Sung　is　here.

TTS:　（still　in　a　loud　voice）　Even　if　Mr.　Sung　hears　us　that's　alright,　he　himself　is　often　hard　up　for　money.

WTC:　You,　Te-sheng,　put　the　porridge　here.（and　while　Te-sheng　puts　the　porridge,　Wang　jumps　over　to　Chan-yuan）　Go　and　get　it　on　credit,　you　blockhead.　（Chan-yuan　rushes　out　like　a　blast　of　wind）

TTS:　（after　putting　the　porridge　on　the　table,　bows　to　Mr.　Sung）　（says　to　WTC）　I　think　Mrs.　Wang　took　all　the　money　we　had.

WTC:　Go　and　get　some　salted　vegetables.（he　sits　up　very　rigidly　and　Te-sheng　returns　to　the　room）　（to　Mr.　Sung）　Mr.　Sung　...

SML:　Master　Wang,　I　have　two　thins　to　talk　over　with　you,　that's　why　I　came　early.

WTC:　（smiling）Tell　me　quickly　and　we　will　do　it　immediately.

SML:　That's　right,　last　night　one　of　my　relatives　came　to　see　me.　He　wants　to　be　introduced　to　you　but　since　it　was　late　I　did　not　bring　him　over.

WTC:　Mr.　Sung,　you　stand　on　ceremonies！　I　am　always　happy　to　see　you,　no　matter　what　time　you　come.

SML:　Master　Wang,　are　you　planning　to　conduct　cargo　or　anything？

WTC:　（thinking　for　a　second）　I　don't　know　yet　whether　I　will　have　any　or　not.　My　work　is　rather　difficult　to　plan,　when　I　have　too　little　cargo　to　convey　it's　not　worth　my　while,　when　there　is　too　much　I　am　afraid　to　undertake　it.　Moreover　if　the　cargo　is　to　be　transported　in　different　directions,　one　East　and　the　other　West,　I　lose　money　on　the　business.　But　if　I　wait　for　all　the　goods　that　are　to　be　transported　to　one　place　it　is　not　very　easy　either.　Right　now　I　have　some　cargo　to　transport　but　it　is　not　quite　enough　to　warrant　a　trip,　that's　the　reason　why　I　say　I　am　not　sure　whether　or　not　I　have　any　business.　Why　are　you　interested？

SML:　Well,　as　I　have　just　said,　a　relative　of　mine　wants　to　be　introduced　to　you.

WTC:　Why？

SML:　He　has　some　cargo　which　he　wants　to　entrust　to　you.

WTC:　Oh,　oh,　I　understand　now.　What　kind　of　cargo　does　he　have　and　where　does　he　want　it　to　go？

SML:　One　thousand　taels　of　silver　to　be　sent　to　Harbin.

WTC:　Good,　very　good.　The　cargo　that　I　have　is　also　to　be　transported　north.　I'll　be　glad　to　do　it.

SML:　（rather　surprised）　You'll　be　glad　to　do　what？

WTC:　Your　relative　will　be　a　friend　of　mine,　why　should　we　discuss　it　anymore？

SML:　No　contract,　nothing　settled　about　the　commission？

WTC:　Since　you　are　the　middle-man,　Mr.Sung,　I　am　sure　everything　will　be　settled　to　our　mutual　satisfaction.　If　ordinarily　I　ask　three　cents,　from　you　I　would　ask　only　two　and　certainly　not　four.　So,　rest　assured　that　everything　will　be　settled.

SML:　（smiling）　Master　Wang,　you　are　a　straightforward　and　quick-thinking　man,　I　would　really　like　to　be　your　friend.

WTC:　（very　proudly）　We　uneducated　people　have　a　one-track　mind.　（and　he　laughs）　Now　what　is　the　second　thing　you　want　to　discuss　with　me？

SML:　（smiled）　Well,　really　it　is　not　very　important.

WTC:　Oh,　tell　me　just　the　same.（outside　the　courtyard　door　a　man　is　knocking　on　the　door）　Te-sheng,　someone　is　at　the　door.　（Te-sheng　came　out　from　the　room　and　ran　towards　the　door）

SML:　（stood　up）　Now　you　have　a　visitor　we　will　talk　about　it　some　other　time.

WTC:　Be　seated,　Mr.　Sung,　I　won't　let　you　until　you　have　had　some　cakes.

SML:　（sits　down　reluctantly）　Really,　Master　Wang,　you　are　very　hospitable.

TTS:　（coming　in）　Teacher,　someone　at　the　door　wants　to　see　you.

WTC:　Who？　What　does　he　want？

TTS:　I　did　not　ask　him.

WTC:　You　fool,　show　him　in.

（TTS　walks　towards　the　gate）　You　see　Mr.　Sung　how　well　trained　my　pupils　are.　That　is　why　I　like　to　see　you　frequently.　Your　good　manners　will　be　an　example　to　us.

SML:　Good　example？　You　flatter　me　much　too　much.

TTS:　（coming　in　with　the　visitor）　Teacher,　this　is　the　man　who　wants　to　see　you.　（TS　goes　back　into　the　room）

CHW:　（very　thin　pigtail　over　his　shoulder　rather　than　down　his　back.　Wears　a　jacket　with　sleeves　and　pants　of　home-spun　material.　The　clothes　are　neither　yellow　nor　white.　Carries　a　small　bundle　on　his　shoulder　where　his　bathing　clothes　are　wrapped）

（looking　at　Mr.　Wang）　Are　you　Master　Wang？　My　name　is　Ch'en　（throws　down　his　bundle　on　the　ground　and　bows　to　Master　Wang　and　Mr.　Sung　and　sits　down　on　his　own　bundle　on　the　ground）

WTC:　（quickly　gives　his　stool　to　the　visitor）　Now　sit　here,　sit　here,　please.

CHW:　No,　this　is　quite　comfortable.

WTC:　Master　Ch'en,　are　you　also　a　boxer？

CHW:　You　have　eyes.　I　know　a　bit　about　boxing.（looks　at　Mr.　Sung）　If　you　have　something　to　discuss,　please　do.　I　will　rest　in　the　meantime.　Have　you　any　water？

WTC:　Yes,　yes.（gives　him　a　bowl　of　porridge　immediately　that　were　standing　on　the　table　cooling）　Would　you　care　for　some　porridge？

CHW:　Good.（takes　over　the　bowl　and　eats　noisily）　Go　ahead　with　your　business.

SML:　（watching　the　two　boxers,　surprised　and　envious　at　the　straightforwardness）　Master　Wang,　you　always　say　that　your　class　of　people　have　no　manners,　but　it　seems　to　me　that　your　way　of　doing　things　seems　correct.

WTC:　We　are　rough　and　ready　people,　are　not　we　Master　Ch'en？

CHW:　We　are　rough　and　we　have　only　a　few　thoughts　in　our　head.　Go　on　with　your　talk.　Very　good,　porridge,　Master　Wang.

WTC:　Well,　Mr.　Sung,　let　us　go　on.

SML:　I　wanted　to　tell　you　this　a　long　time　ago　but　I　always　felt　shy　about　it.

WTC:　Whenever　you　will　forget　the　polite　talk,　I　will　...

SML:　Yes,　I　am　learning,　and　I　want　to　learn　still　more.　（getting　excited）　I　wanted　to　tell　you　long　long　ago　that　I　would　like　to　accompany　you　on　one　of　your　trips.

WTC:　Where？

SML:　（half　defiant,　half　sarcastic）　Of　course　you　won't　take　me　on　one　of　your　caravan　trips？

WTC:　（surprised）　You,　an　educated　man,　interested　in　such　a　trip？

SML:　（nodding）　I　am　afraid　you　will　refuse　to　take　me.

WTC:　If　you　gather　up　your　courage,　I　should　be　only　too　glad　to　do　it.　To　have　you　as　a　travelling　companion,　is　too　good　to　be　true.

SML:　（very　seriously）　Master　Wang,　physically　I　am　not　very　strong.　I　don't　know　how　to　box.　I　can　only　say　that　I　have　the　courage　to　go.　If　you　don't　think　it　is　too　troublesome　for　you,　I　will　go　with　you.

WTC:　No　trouble　at　all,　we　will　do　it.

SML:　And　besides　I　have　not　got　much　money.

WTC:　（grasping　Sung's　arms）　Mister　Sung,　don't　talk　about　money,　we　are　supposed　to　be　good　friends,　and　what　is　money　among　friends.　You　will　have　to　put　up　with　all　the　hardships,　whatever　I　eat,　you　will　eat　the　same,　whatever　I　drink,　you　will　drink　the　same,　and　it　is　all　on　me.

Moreover,　if　you　don't　know　how　to　ride　a　house.　I　will　get　a　donkey　for　you,　a　very　steady　donkey.（laughs　loudly）

SML:　No　matter　whether　it　is　a　horse　or　a　donkey,　I　just　want　to　go　with　you.　（gets　away　from　Mr.　Wang's　grip）

CHW:　（finished　the　bowl　of　porridge）　Master　Wang,　now　you　have　some　business.　Good.　To　celebrate　I　should　have　another　bowl　of　porridge.

WTC:　（gives　the　second　bowl　to　Master　Ch'en）　Take　it　slowly,　we　will　have　some　cakes　soon.

SML:　Master　Wang,　you　are　a　real　friend.

WTC:　Don't　flatter　me.　With　your　learning　and　personality　you　should　be　my　teacher.

SML:　No,　it　should　be　exactly　the　other　way　round.　It　is　true　that　I　have　read　a　lot,　but　books　are　dead　things,　we　humans　are　living　beings.　Although　you　cannot　read　...

WTC:　Yes,　I　know　one　character,　that's　my　surname　Wang.　Mr.　Sung,　it　is　rather　queer　ever　since　I　could　read　my　surname,　I　began　to　feel　that　my　surname　is　really　Wang,　and　I　feel　very　self　confident.　It　is　just　like　signing　a　contract,　once　it　is　signed.

SML:　Oh,　I　am　tired　of　reading.　Now　I　want　to　see　real　mountains,　real　rivers,　and　real　people.　When　I　read　at　home,　I　only　know　books,　and　gradually　I　will　become　a　bookworm.　Now　I　want　to　see　places　outside　of　Peking.

WTC:　Isolated　mountains　and　wild　rivers　are　nothing　beautiful　to　look　at.

SML:　I　don't　believe　you.　You　think　just　because　I　can　read　I　must　be　wonderful,　it　seems　to　me　that　you　are　the　wonder.

WTC:　Me？

SML:　It　is　true.　At　the　very　best　I　am　only　a　bookworm,　but　you　are　a　real　son　of　Han.　I　can　very　well　imagine　when　you　carry　all　the　cargo　and　go　over　the　high　mountains　and　go　through　wide　rivers,　you　fear　absolutely　nothing　as　though　the　whole　world　belongs　to　you.　Am　I　right？

WTC:　I　don't　know.

SML:　A　true　man　knows　nothing　yet　knows　everything.　As　for　myself　I　can　read　books,　I　know　the　characters　but　what　do　I　really　understand　that　is　why　I　want　to　go　to　improve　my　knowledge.　I　konw　our　country　out　of　books,　now　I　want　to　see　my　country　with　my　own　eyes.

WTC:　No　matter　whether　you　want　to　see　our　country　or　a　foreign　country,　I　will　be　glad　to　take　you　with　me.

CHW:　（finished　the　second　bowl）　Master　Wang,　I　will　go　with　you　too.

WTC:　Ah！　What！

LCY:　（carrying　cakes,　coming　in）　Master,　here　are　the　cakes.　Eat　them　quickly.　Mrs.　Wang　is　coming.

WTC:　Don't　talk　so　much,　go　and　get　more　porridge.　（unwraps　the　cakes）　Please,　please.

TTS:　（carrying　a　tray　with　several　bowls　of　porridge,　coming　out　of　the　room,　crying　in　a　singsong　voice）　Porridge　is　coming,　porridge　is　coming.

（Li　Chan-yuan　helps　TTS　to　put　all　the　bowls　on　the　table）

WTC:　（to　the　visitors）　Please,　accept　my　humble　offering.

SML:　Should　not　we　wait　for　Mrs.　Wang？

WTC:　No,　it　is　not　necessary.　Please　go　ahead.

Mrs.　W:　（holding　Niu-niu's　hand　who　in　turn　holds　a　market　kerchief　with　wheat　cakes）　Of　course,　don't　wait　for　me,　I　am　not　counted　as　a　human　being　here.　（as　soon　as　she　saw　Mr.　Sung,　her　expression　and　manner　changed　immediately）　Oh,　Mr.　Sung,　you　are　here.　Niu-niu,　give　Mr.　Sung　some　wheat　cakes　quickly.　（looks　at　Master　Ch'en）　This　gentleman？

SML:　（standing　up）　Mrs.　Wang,　please　come　to　join　us.　（and　sits　down）

CHW:　（with　mouth　full　of　cakes,　stands　up,　bows）　Mrs.　Wang？　My　name　is　Ch'en,　I　am　at　your　service.　（sits　down）

WSM:　（coming　over　with　wheat　cakes）　Mr.　Sung,　please　have　one,　they　are　all　hot,　eat.　（looks　at　Master　Chen）　I　will　also　give　you　one.

SML:　（taking　a　cake　from　the　girl　and　turning　to　Mrs.　Wang）　Do　come　here　to　join　us.

Mrs.　W:　Please　go　ahead,　Mr.　Sung.　I　will　wait　for　a　moment.（goes　towards　the　room　and　nods　to　Li　Chan-yuan,　Li　follows　her　and　says）

LCY:　What？

Mrs.　W:　（in　a　low　voice）　Where　did　they　get　the　cakes？

LCY:　（trying　to　show　off,　turns　his　head　and　seeing　that　they　are　all　eating）　On　credit.　I　went　to　buy　them　on　credit,　but　my　teacher　was　the　one　who　told　me　...

Mrs.　W:　（turns　her　head　and　stares　at　her　husband　then　goes　toward　the　room　angrily）　（LCY　stood　for　a　while　and　followed　her）

CHW:　Master　Wang,　I　will　go　with　you.

WTC:　What　for？

CHW:　Go　with　the　cargo.　I　know　a　bit　about　boxing.

WTC:　I　can　see　that.

CHW:　（getting　excited　and　stands　up）　I　will　go　with　you.　You　don't　need　to　pay　me　anything　but　you　must　teach　me　how　to　use　the　Spear　that　Demolishes　Five　Tigers　at　Once.

WTC:　What？　The　Spear　that　Demolishes　Five　Tigers　at　Once？　（and　rises　slowly）　How　do　you　know　that　I　can　use　that　spear？

CHW:　Well,　it　is　known　all　over　the　world　,every　boxer　knows　that　you,　only　you,　can　teach　the　secret　of　that　spear,　I　have　walked　300　miles　on　foot　to　come　to　you　to　learn.

SML:　（stands　up）　I　must　be　going　now.　Many,　many　thanks.

WTC:　Te-sheng,　please　take　our　guest　to　the　door.　（and　he　himself,　together　with　TS　walk　behind　Mr.　Sung）

WSM:　（to　Master　Ch'en）　My　father　won't　teach　you　how　to　use　the　spear.

CHW:　Why？

WSM:　He　does　not　even　teach　it　to　his　two　pupils.　My　father　says　that　he　wants　to　keep　it　for　teaching　me.

CHW:　You　are　being　trained　too？

WSM:　Oh,　yes,　I　learn　boxing　every　day.　I　learn　fists,　sword,　spear　and　everything　else.

CHW:　Heng！　you　say　that　he　won't　teach　me？

WTC:　（coming　from　the　gate）　That's　right.　I　cannot　teach　that　to　anyone,　that's　my　last　resource.　Nobody　can　learn　it　from　me　except　my　daughter.　（TTS　and　WSM　both　take　some　cakes　to　eat）

CHW:　I　will　show　you　some　of　my　boxing　to　see　whether　or　not　I　am　qualified　to　learn　that　spear　or　not.　（he　walks　towards　the　wooden　case　where　the　swords　are　standing）

WTC:　It　is　not　necessary.　I　am　not　going　to　teach　you.

CHW:　But　I　have　walked　300　miles.

WTC:　Are　you　Ch'en　Hsiang-wu　of　Cha's　School　of　Boxing？

CHW:　That's　right.

WTC:　I　have　heard　about　you　for　a　long　time,　Master　Ch'en.　You　want　to　learn　the　spear　with　me,　I　should　learn　something　from　you.　Well,　Master　Ch'en　if　you　want　to　take　a　rest,　please　stay　here　for　a　few　days.　I　am　sorry　I　cannot　offer　you　anything　but　very　simple　meals　and　tea,　but　still　you　are　very　welcome.　And　when　you　are　ready　to　leave　on　your　journey,　I　will　give　you　your　travelling　expenses.　As　for　that　spear,　I　just　cannot　teach　you.

CHW:　（remains　silent　for　a　while,　then）　Is　that　your　final　decision？

WTC:　Yes.

CHW:　（very　slowly　takes　up　his　little　bundle）　Well,　I　will　see　you　again　sometime.

WTC:　Why　do　you　leave？　Why　not　stay　here　for　a　few　days—food,　board　and　tea　is　ready　for　you　here.

CHW:　Thank　you.（looks　very　disappointed,　puts　the　bundle　on　his　shoulder　and　walks　towards　the　gate,　dragging　his　feet）

WTC:　（following　Master　Ch'en）　Master　Ch'en,　whenever　you　want　to　come　and　see　me,　you　are　welcome,　we　are,　after　all,　friends.

CHW:　（without　turning　his　head,　only　lifts　his　hand　in　farewell　movement　and　leaves）

WSW:　（takes　a　piece　of　cake）　Ma,　ma,　visitors　are　all　gone,　why　not　come　to　eat　some　cakes.

Mrs.　W:　（coming　out　of　the　room,　seeing　that　visitors　were　really　gone,　turns　her　head　toward　the　room　and　calls）　Chan-yuan,　come　here.

LCY:　（comes　out）　Oh,　I　am　terribly　hungry.　（wanted　to　go　towards　the　cakes）

Mrs.　W:　Wait　a　minute.（Mr.　Wang　returns　from　the　gate　and　Mrs.　Wang　addresses　them　both）　How　many　times　did　I　tell　you　that　you　should　not　buy　things　on　credit,　why　don't　you　listen　to　me？

LCY:　That's　my　teacher's　fault.　（goes　over　to　Shih-mei　and　takes　cake　out　of　her　hand　and　puts　it　into　his　mouth）

WTC:　This　is　really　terrible,　you　only　know　that　I　should　not　buy　things　on　credit,　when　our　guests　come,　can　I　let　them　go　with　an　empty　stomach？　You,　women,　women.

Mrs.　W:　What　guests？　They　come　here　and　eat,　finish　their　eating,　wipe　their　mouths　and　go　away.　Guests？　Heng！

WTC:　What　else　do　you　expect　them　to　do？　Do　you　expect　them　to　sing　an　opera　for　you？　（turns　to　TTS）　Hei,　Te-sheng,　stop　eating.　Go　and　hire　some　horses　and　carts.　You　are　good　for　nothing,　you　would　take　anything　that　has　four　legs　to　be　a　horse.　Chan-yuan,　you　go　and　hire　the　horses.　The　carts　must　be　in　good　condition,　horses　must　be　strong.　We　want　six　horses　at　least　and　three　carts　and　I　also　want　a　strong　donkey.

LCY:　Oh,　we　have　a　business　now.　（so　he　takes　several　cakes　and　runs　away）

WTC:　Te-sheng,　what　did　I　tell　you,　stop　eating;　go　and　get　some　hired　hands　who　will　know　the　north.　Do　you　understand？　Well,　I　just　cannot　trust　you.　No,　I　will　go　myself.

TTS:　Teacher,　I　know,　I　can　do　it.

WTC:　You　must　choose　your　hired　men　carefully,　don't　just　look　at　them　and　take　them　...

TTS:　Yes,　I　know　teacher.　（and　ready　to　leave）

WTC:　Put　on　your　coat,　you.

WSM:　I　will　get　it　for　you.　（she　runs　into　the　room）

Mrs.　W:　（not　so　angry　now　and　slowly　walking　towards　her　husband）　Have　you　really　got　some　business？

WTC:　Why　should　I　buy　cakes　on　credit　otherwise？

WSM:　（carrying　a　coat　and　running　like　lightening）　Here's　your　cost,　don't　forget　to　get　a　good　toy　for　me.

TTS:　One　thing　at　a　time.　If　I　get　two　orders　at　once,　I　will　mix　them　both.　（he　leaves）

WTC:　Niu-niu,　after　a　test,　you　go　and　lie　down　on　the　bench　again.　Do　you　hear　me？

I　am　going　to　collect　the　cargoes,　if　you　are　obedient,　I　will　get　a　good　toy　for　you.

Mrs.　W:　When　will　you　go　with　the　cargo？

WTC:　（defiantly）　Pretty　soon.

Mrs.　W:　Oh,　I　must　go　and　mend　your　socks.

WTC:　（sarcastically）　Eat　some　cakes　first　and　then　mend　the　socks.

Mrs.　W:　Stop　your　nonsense.

（the　stage　darkens）





