6


Fourth　Master　Tang　was　in　a　hurry　to　get　Jeweled　Lute's　share　of　the　first　night's　take,　and　as　usual　he　was　sure　everyone　was　conniving　to　cheat　him.　He　gave　Pao　Ching　and　the　man　in　the　box_office　a　searching,　distrustful　look,　while　they　were　anxiously　trying　to　settle　the　accounts.　From　the　box_office　he　went　backstage　to　see　if　the　company　were　behaving,　then　back　to　the　front　again.　He　wanted　the　money　in　his　hands　quickly,　before　the　others　might　rob　his　daughter　of　a　single　penny.

Mrs.　Tang　was　too　fat　to　watch　the　accountancy　herself.　If　she　wedged　herself　in　the　box_office　there　would　be　no　room　for　anyone　else.　So　she　sat　like　a　Buddha　in　the　largest　chair　backstage,　and　kept　her　eyes　on　what　she　thought　her　husband　couldn't　see.　She　wanted　to　get　her　hands　on　the　money　more　than　anyone.　Meanwhile　she　chatted　with　Lotus　Charm　in　a　friendly　manner,　enjoying　her　innocent　prattle.　Mrs.　Tang　had　motherly　instincts,　and　admired　innocence　in　others.

Because　of　the　large　number　of　complimentary　tickets　given　out,　the　proceeds　of　the　show　were　not　large　enough　to　provide　the　agreed　“shares"　for　all　the　actors.　According　to　the　usual　practice,　the　loss　should　be　shared　proportionately　among　them.　But　Pao　Ching　generously　announced　that　because　this　was　the　opening　night,　he　would　give　up　his　own　share　altogether　so　that　everyone　else　would　get　a　full　share:　he　wanted　all　the　artists　to　turn　up　the　next　night;　after　all,　he　had　to　buy　the　good　will　of　his　workers.

When　Fourth　Master　Tang　heard　this,　he　was　more　suspicious　than　ever.　Having　never　made　a　sacrifice　himself,　he　could　not　believe　that　anyone　would　give　up　anything.　Pao　Ching　must　have　cached　some　of　the　money　away;　he　was　just　showing　off　his　generosity,　and　Tang　wasn't　going　to　let　him　get　away　with　that.

But　the　receipts　and　the　accounts　were　there　right　in　front　of　his　eyes.　Fourth　Master　Tang　could　find　no　error.　He　hurried　over　to　his　wife　and　whispered　in　her　ear.　What　should　they　do？　How　could　they　trick　this　cunning　Pao　Ching？　They　had　both　been　living　on　Jeweled　Lute　for　ten　years.　They　had　been　cheated　before.　They　had　to　think　of　some　way　to　squeeze　something　more　out　of　Pao　Ching,　even　if　only　half　a　dollar.

After　a　minute　of　whispering　Mrs.　Tang　decided　to　accept　the　cash　allotted　to　Jeweled　Lute.　She　wanted　to　feel　it　in　her　pocket,　next　to　her　skin;　it　would　be　safe　there.　Then　Fourth　Master　Tang　was　to　take　Jeweled　Lute　home,　and　leave　Mrs.　Tang　alone　to　handle　Pao　Ching.　She　was　a　woman.　If　she　lost　out,　she　could　forget　the　whole　matter　and　not　lose　face　by　the　defeat.　It　was　worth　trying,　anyhow.　She　drew　a　deep　breath,　folded　her　hands　across　her　vast　stomach,　and　waited.

Jeweled　Lute　wanted　to　leave　herself.　There　must　be　many　people　outside　waiting　to　look　at　her.　Rich　men,　perhaps,　and　handsome　playboys.　She　liked　to　be　looked　at.　When　people　looked　at　her　as　they　did,　she　felt　really　beautiful.　So　with　considerable　wiggling　of　her　hips,　she　went　out,　her　father　following　at　a　discreet　distance.

Meanwhile　Mrs.　Tang　sat　giggling　foolishly　like　an　old　hen　who　had　just　laid　an　egg.　Suddenly　she　stopped.　“Pao　Ching,"　she　cried,　“come　over　here.　I　want　to　talk　to　you.　It　is　most　important！"

Pao　Ching　knew　that　nothing　she　could　have　to　say　would　be　pleasant.　But　he　went　over,　smilingly.　“What　do　you　want　to　say　to　me,　my　dear　Mrs.　Tang？"　he　asked.

“I　want　to　ask　you　just　this.　Who　won　most　applause　in　tonight's　show？"

“Jeweled　Lute,　undoubtedly.　She　has　personality,"　Pao　Ching　admitted　very　frankly.

“Good.　You're　telling　the　truth　at　last,　Pao　Ching.　Now　I　will　tell　you　the　truth.　We　are　working　together　—　the　two　families.　But　my　beautiful　talented　daughter　got　the　most　applause.　That　means　she　is　a　drawing　card;　so,　if　she　is　a　drawing　card,　she　should　have　a　larger　share.　Don't　you　agree？"

Pao　Ching　did　not　want　to　tell　her　that　even　if　Jeweled　Lute　studied　another　three　years,　her　singing　technique　would　not　match　that　of　Lotus　Charm.　That　her　voice　was　loud　and　vulgar.　Neither　did　he　want　to　remind　her　that　if　he　had　not　formed　the　company.　Jeweled　Lute　would　not　have　made　a　cent.　He　smiled　disarmingly　at　Mrs.　Tang.

Mrs.　Tang　smiled　back　at　him.　“Pao　Ching　—　please　don't　just　stand　there　and　smile.　Do　something.　If　you　don't　want　to　pay　more　to　a　good　artist,　my　daughter　will　..."

“Will　what？"　Pao　Ching's　thick　eyebrows　shot　up.　He　was　annoyed　now.　In　two　weeks　he　had　walked　holes　in　a　dozen　pairs　of　socks　just　to　give　everybody　a　chance　to　make　a　little　money.　And　he　expected　some　appreciation.　Now　this　greedy　old　blabbermouth　...

Mrs.　Tang　relented　quickly　when　she　saw　Pao　Ching's　expression.　“Don't　tell　me　you　don't　know　what　she'll　do,　Pao　Ching.　You　know　show　business！"

“I　don't　know."　Pao　Ching　could　suppress　his　anger　no　longer.　“And　I　don't　care."　He　had　been　up　before　dawn.　All　day　he　had　worked,　talked,　argued,　persuaded,　praised.　He　had　sung,　and　not　earned　a　cent.　He　hadn't　had　his　dinner　yet,　and　was　at　the　end　of　his　patience.　He　merely　glared　at　her.

“All　right,"　Mrs.　Tang　muttered.　She　struggled　to　ease　her　enormous　body　out　of　the　chair.　“From　the　way　it　looks,　you　are　not　going　to　give　in　—　not　even　a　cent."

“Why　should　I？　I　worked　for　nothing　today,　and　you　all　have　taken　a　full　share.　You　aren't　reasonable　at　all."

“But　there　is　professional　prestige,　my　friend.　Jeweled　Lute　should　get　at　least　one　dollar　more　than　Lotus　Charm.　She's　worth　it."

Pao　Ching　shook　his　head　very　firmly.　“No　—　not　a　cent."

“All　right,　my　short_sighted　friend,　we'll　see　you　tomorrow."　Mrs.　Tang　waddled　away.　At　the　door　she　stopped　and　turned　slowly　around.　“Or　perhaps　we　won't　see　you　tomorrow."

“As　you　like,　Mrs.　Tang,"　shouted　Pao　Ching.　His　face　was　livid　with　anger.

Useless　Fang　had　taken　Pao　Ching's　wife,　Mrs.　Fang,　back　to　the　hotel.　Lotus　Charm　was　waiting　for　her　father　in　the　theater.　Ever　since　Lotus　Charm　had　been　on　the　stage,she　had　waited　for　Pao　Ching　to　take　her　home　after　the　show.　If　the　weather　was　good　and　the　theater　was　not　too　far　away　from　where　they　lived,　they　would　walk　under　the　clear　night　sky.　These　walks　after　the　show　were　among　the　happiest　moments　in　Pao　Ching's　life.

He　always　walked　at　a　slow　pace　so　Lotus　Charm　could　easily　keep　up　with　him.　With　his　hands　clasped　behind　his　back,　his　shoulders　relaxed,　and　his　head　bent,　he　walked　in　slow　luxurious　content.　A　walk　like　this　allowed　him　to　forget　his　desperate　fatigue.　And　usually　Lotus　Charm　took　advantage　of　these　walks　to　tell　him　all　her　little　grievances.　Pao　Ching　liked　to　listen　to　her　complaints.　Sometimes　he　would　comfort　her;　sometimes　he　said　nothing,　except　to　make　clicking　noises　with　his　tongue.　Sometimes　he　would　take　her　to　a　little　restaurant　nearby　for　something　good　to　eat.　He　enjoyed　seeing　her　shining　black　eyes　lit　with　anticipation,　as　she　waited　for　her　favorite　dishes.　Sometimes　he　would　take　her　to　a　bazaar　and　buy　her　a　toy.　Although　Lotus　Charm　was　already　fourteen　she　still　like　to　play　with　dolls　and　toys.

But　tonight　after　Mrs.　Tang　had　left,　Pao　Ching　paced　back　and　forth　on　the　stage,　his　hands　clasped　tightly　behind　him.　Suppose　Mrs.　Tang　really　did　not　let　Jeweled　Lute　sing　tomorrow！　Well,　he　could　do　without　her,　even　though　she　was　an　attraction　for　the　common　folk.

“Father,"　Lotus　Charm　called　softly,　“shall　we　go　home　now？"

When　Pao　Ching　saw　her　small　appealing　face,　he　smiled.　This　charming　creature　was　so　different　from　Jeweled　Lute.　Anyhow,　Jeweled　Lute　was　not　worth　getting　upset　about.　The　Tangs　would　probably　rather　have　her　sell　her　body　than　her　art.　And　she'd　make　more　money,　too！　But　Lotus　Charm　was　still　a　human　flower　in　bud.　Although　she　had　been　associating　with　singing　girls　for　more　than　four　years,　she　had　not　acquired　any　of　their　evil　ways.　“Yes,　let's　go,"　Pao　Ching　agreed.　“Let's　walk　home."　He　had　forgotten　his　troubles.　He　was　thinking　of　all　the　fun　he　had　had　with　her　on　their　walks　home　after　the　shows　in　Peiping,　Tientsin,　and　Shanghai.

When　Pao　Ching　and　Lotus　Charm　emerged　from　the　theater　the　streets　were　almost　empty.　Most　of　the　shops　were　closed　and　the　street　lights　were　out.　Pao　Ching　walked　slowly,　his　head　bowed,　his　hands　behind　his　back.　He　felt　wonderfully　relaxed.　He　was　glad　the　streets　were　dim　—　so　that　people　could　not　recognize　them.　They　were　alone.　He　didn't　have　to　greet　someone　every　few　steps.　He　walked　even　slower　so　that　the　pleasure　of　being　unrecognized　and　relaxed　would　last　longer.

“Father,"　Lotus　Charm　asked　softly.

“Huh？"　Pao　Ching　was　deep　in　thought.

“Why　were　you　so　angry　with　Mrs.　Tang　just　now,　father？　What　shall　we　do　if　Jeweled　Lute　really　quits　tomorrow？"　Her　dark　eyes　regarded　him　thoughtfully.　When　she　was　alone　with　her　father　she　liked　to　talk　like　a　grownup,　to　impress　him　that　she　was　no　longer　a　child　interested　only　in　playing　with　dolls.

“It　doesn't　...　doesn't　matter.　With　her　we'll　eat.　And　without　her　we'll　eat　too."　Pao　Ching　always　acted　self_confident　in　front　of　his　family.　Sometimes　he　bluffed.　But　it　was　a　kindly　practice　—　to　give　them　a　sense　of　security.

“But　Jeweled　Lute　can　do　something　else　so　they　won't　starve."

Pao　Ching　cleared　his　throat.　So　Lotus　Charm　knew　the　facts　of　life.　He　should　have　known　that,　seeing　she　was　with　singing　girls　much　of　the　time.　With　a　smile　in　his　voice　he　asked,　“What　other　kind　of　`business'　does　she　do？"

Lotus　Charm　giggled.　“I　don't　exactly　know."　Her　voice　had　a　hint　of　apology,　because　she　had　said　something　which　she　could　not　enlarge　on.　“Perhaps　I　shouldn't　have　put　it　that　way,　should　I,　father？"

Pao　Ching　did　not　answer　immediately.　He　was　not　alarmed　that　Lotus　Charm　did　not　know　quite　how　Jeweled　Lute　made　money　on　the　side.　After　all,　she　sang　—　love　songs　and　ballads　every　day　without　understanding　them.　But　he　was　worried　because　the　girl　had　to　grow　up　into　a　woman.　What　kind　of　a　woman　would　she　be？　His　shoulders　tensed　again,　feeling　as　if　a　heavy　burden　had　been　put　on　them.

After　a　long　pause　he　said,　“I've　nothing　to　learn　from　Fourth　Master　Tang　—　and　there　is　no　reason　why　you　should　learn　from　Jeweled　Lute　either.　Do　you　hear？"

“Yes,　father,　I　hear,"　Lotus　Charm　said.　But　her　tone　did　not　sound　as　though　she　understood　what　he　meant.

They　walked　the　rest　of　the　way　home　without　talking.

When　they　got　to　the　hotel　Pao　Ching　remembered　that　he　and　Lotus　Charm　had　not　eaten　dinner.　He　felt　empty　inside　as　he　climbed　the　stairs.　He　hoped　there　was　something　to　eat　at　home.　It　would　be　nice　to　have　a　happy　meal　with　the　whole　family,　to　celebrate　the　opening.

To　his　surprise,　Mrs.　Fang　was　still　sober,　and　she　had　prepared　dinner　for　them.

Pao　Ching　was　suddenly　happy　—　so　happy　that　the　day's　worries　vanished　altogether.　He　was　easy　to　please.　A　little　show　of　kindness　—　and　he　would　be　in　the　best　of　humor,　even　if　he　had　been　desperately　unhappy　a　moment　before.　Now,he　wanted　to　say　something　to　praise　his　wife.　“A　meal.　That's　wonderful,"　he　burst　out.　She　gave　him　an　angry　look.

“What　else　did　you　expect？"　she　snapped.

Pao　Ching's　face　fell.　“Oh,　don't　get　mad,　please,"　he　pleaded.　“I'm　tired."

Useless　Fang　had　been　in　bed　for　a　long　time　already.　He　felt　tired　because　he　had　supervised　the　ceremony　for　the　opening.　Pao　Ching　woke　him　up　and　asked　him　to　join　them　for　dinner.

Lotus　Charm　tried　to　help　her　father　create　a　happy　atmos_phere.　She　called　her　mother　“Mama"　in　a　tender　affectionate　voice,　and　helped　her　sister　Phoenix　Girl　prepare　the　food.

Mrs.　Fang　never　showed　any　love　toward　Lotus　Charm.　She　kept　such　tenderness　as　she　had　for　her　own　daughter.

Phoenix　Girl　was　two　years　older　than　Lotus　Charm,　but　she　looked　at　least　twenty_three　or　four.　She　was　a　plump,　stocky　girl,　not　much　taller　than　Lotus　Charm,　but　wider　everywhere.　She　had　an　undistinguished　oval　face,　and　her　cheeks　were　always　pimply.　She　usually　wore　a　navy　cotton　gown,　and　did　her　abundant　black　hair　in　one　severe　long　braid　down　her　back.　Generally　she　looked　as　if　she　had　all　the　troubles　of　the　world.　When　she　happened　to　smile,　she　showed　attractive　teeth,　in　beautiful　even　rows.　Smiling,　she　looked　much　prettier　and　younger.

In　recent　months,　Lotus　Charm　had　come　to　realize　that　she　herself　was　an　orphan,　and　that　her　appearing　on　the　stage　as　a　drum　singer　made　her　a　person　of　low　class.　Phoenix　Girl　had　no　beauty　nor　could　she　sing,　but　Lotus　Charm　knew　she　had　social　standing.　Whenever　Phoenix　Girl　smiled　at　her,　she　was　sure　there　was　hidden　sarcasm　in　it,　as　if　she　was　laughing　at　her.

After　dinner,　Useless　Fang　went　back　to　bed.　Mrs.　Fang　had　not　had　enough　to　drink　to　make　her　happy.　When　everyone　had　finished,　she　shouted,　“Go　away　from　me,　all　of　you.　Leave　me　in　peace　to　have　my　drink."

Pao　Ching,　Phoenix　Girl,　and　Lotus　Charm　were　undecided.　If　they　left　her　alone,　she　might　lose　her　temper.　If　they　stayed,　her　drinking　might　go　on　all　night.　Pao　Ching　needed　rest　badly,　but　he　dared　not　go　for　fear　she　would　start　a　quarrel.　He　nibbled　his　lip.　He　wanted　this　day　to　end　happily;　that　would　mean　a　blessing　and　good　luck.　At　all　costs　he　must　avoid　a　squabble　at　the　last　moment.

He　tried　to　stifle　a　yawn　as　he　looked　down　at　his　wife.　She　looked　at　him　and　winked　suggestively,　solemnly　declaring　that　she　would　not　drink　more.

Pao　Ching　was　too　exhausted　to　stay　awake　any　longer.　He　let　out　a　loud　yawn　and　settled　into　a　chair.　Mrs.　Fang　regarded　him　sadly.　“Go,　go　to　sleep,　and　sleep　yourself　to　death,"　she　snarled.　Her　eyes　were　darkly　outraged.

Pao　Ching　did　not　answer.　He　nodded　to　the　two　girls　and　walked　out.　In　his　own　room　he　stretched　out　on　the　bed,　sighed,　and　slept.　This　had　been　a　day,　and　no　mistake.

“Phoenix！"　Mrs.　Fang　said.　“Never　marry　a　showman.　He　is　always　too　tired　for　anything　after　the　show　at　night！"　Then　she　looked　at　Lotus.　“Heng！　A　show　girl　is　still　worse！"

Lotus　Charm　gasped,　but　said　nothing.





