11


The　enemy　planes　had　not　been　over　Chungking　for　a　week.　Many　refugees　were　going　back　to　the　capital.　They　could　find　nowhere　to　live　in　South　Warm　Springs　and　other　villages,　and　food　was　scarce.　Chungking　was　home　to　them.　Was　it　not　better　to　go　back　and　take　the　chance　of　being　killed　by　a　bomb　than　to　stay　in　this　village　and　starve　to　death？

Pao　Ching　decided　to　stay　on.　He　made　his　decision　after　careful　deliberation.　The　rebuilding　of　his　precious　theater　was　the　deciding　factor.　The　laborers　in　the　city　were　all　occupied　building　air_raid　shelters　and　repairing　government　offices.　However　much　he　would　be　willing　to　pay,　neither　he　nor　the　owner　of　the　theater　would　be　able　to　hire　any　workmen.　Then　again,　he　feared　the　air　raids　might　be　resumed.　It　required　only　an　occasional　raid;　and　there　would　be　no　business　for　a　theater.　Better　to　make　shift　in　this　little　town,　even　if　the　take　was　low.　He　had　only　his　own　family　and　the　Tangs　to　consider;　surely　he　could　manage　to　support　them　all.

South　Warm　Springs,　surrounded　by　its　green　hills,　should　have　been　a　haven　of　peace,　but　Pao　Ching　found　that　there　was　as　much　to　worry　about　in　a　small　town　as　in　a　large　city.　This　community　was　so　small　and　compact　that　everyone　knew　each　other,　and　most　of　the　people　had　nothing　better　to　do　than　to　gossip.

Whenever　Lotus　Charm　went　out　the　villagers　stared　at　her　and　passed　remarks.　But　there　was　rarely　criticism　because　Lotus　Charm　and　Phoenix　Girl,　who　usually　went　bathing　together,　always　dressed　modestly　and　behaved　with　scrupulous　good　taste.　They　were　novelties　to　the　people　of　South　Warm　Springs,　and　so　they　attracted　attention.　But　when　Jeweled　Lute　went　out　with　them,　the　older　folk　would　hiss　and　whistle,　and　the　young　men　would　follow　them　passing　offensive　remarks.

Pao　Ching　worried　about　this.　He　knew　his　own　daughters　were　safe　when　they　walked　by　themselves,　but　when　they　appeared　with　Jeweled　Lute　the　whole　town　took　them　for　street　walkers.

Lotus　Charm　came　back　from　one　outing　flushed　and　angry.　“Why　do　they　torment　me　when　I　go　out　with　her？"　she　demanded.　“What's　the　difference？She's　a　girl　like　me."

Pao　Ching　didn't　want　to　be　blunt.　“Go　out　with　her　as　little　as　you　can."

“But　she　asks　me　—　she　always　wants　to　go　out."

“Then　don't　go,"　he　answered　and　walked　away.　Why　couldn't　he　tell　her　about　Jeweled　Lute？He　wanted　to　explain　the　difference　between　the　Fangs　and　the　Tang　family,　but　it　all　concerned　Jeweled　Lute's　relations　with　men,　and　he　found　this　impossible　to　discuss.　He　was　afraid.　He　might　say　the　wrong　thing　and　stimulate　Lotus　Charm's　curiosity;　she　might　go　out　and　experiment　herself,　and　get　into　trouble.

Lotus　Charm　was　puzzled　and　irritated　by　her　father's　reticence.　She　was　half　afraid　of　Jeweled　Lute,　but　at　the　same　time　she　wanted　to　find　out　why　the　girl　was　different,　why　she　attracted　so　much　attention　in　the　streets.

One　day　she　and　Jeweled　Lute　were　strolling　beside　a　tiny　brook　which　ran　through　the　town.　They　had　reached　the　outskirts　of　South　Warm　Springs　where　the　brook　became　wider.　Ahead　were　great　masses　of　hills,　down　which　little　streams　plunged　in　feathery　white　cascades.　And　between　them　and　the　hills　were　green　forests,　in　bright　contrast　with　the　clear　sky.　The　scene　looked　more　like　a　painting　than　a　real　landscape.　Lotus　Charm　was　entranced.　With　little　cries　of　joy　she　walked　faster,　as　if　she　wanted　to　run　to　the　foot　of　the　distant　hills.

Suddenly　they　came　upon　a　man　sitting　on　a　large　rock　beside　the　stream.　Jeweled　Lute　went　over　to　him　and　greeted　him　warmly.　Lotus　Charm　stopped,　wondering　what　to　do.　Obviously　Jeweled　Lute　had　an　appointment.　Lotus　Charm　did　not　want　to　walk　on　alone,　so　she　sat　on　the　riverbank　a　little　distance　from　where　they　were　talking,　and　watched　the　fish　darting　to　and　fro　in　the　clear　water.　She　felt　embarrassed.　But　how　interesting　the　fish　were.　Some　were　little　more　than　an　inch　long,　with　eyes　like　pearls.　She　was　fascinated.

Presently　she　was　aware　that　Jeweled　Lute　was　at　her　elbow.　“Lotus　Charm,"　she　said　with　a　slight　snicker,　“how　would　you　like　to　go　with　this　man？He　is　a　nice　fellow,　and　rich.　He　wants　you,　and　he'll　give　you　anything　you　ask."

Lotus　Charm　got　up　as　if　she　had　been　stabbed.　She　did　not　know　why,　but　deep　inside　her　rose　the　feeling　that　she　was　being　insulted.　She　blushed,　and　then　turned　white.　She　wanted　to　talk　but　there　were　no　words.　She　held　her　head　high,　resting　her　eyes　on　the　lovely　green　hills,　but　fascinated,　they　went　back　to　Jeweled　Lute.

Then　she　turned　and　ran.　After　a　while　she　slowed　her　pace　down　to　a　walk,　her　little　braids　flapping　on　each　side　of　her　neck.　Impatiently　she　grabbed　them　and　held　them,　kept　walking,　not　looking　back,　not　hesitating　till　she　reached　the　hotel.

She　went　straight　to　bed.　There　she　lay　half　awake　pondering　the　incident.　Why　had　Jeweled　Lute　asked　her　to　go　with　that　man？What　was　love,　that　it　could　earn　a　girl　money？Recently　in　South　Warm　Springs　she　had　seen　young　men　and　girls,　walking　in　the　countryside　very　close　together,　sitting　on　the　grass　holding　hands.　That　seemed　all　right.　She　admired　them,　but　to　her　they　were　people　from　a　different　world.　They　were　entitled　to　such　freedom.　She　was　a　mere　entertainer,　they　were　respectable　students.　The　men　students,　she　decided,　would　never　ask　her　to　walk　with　them　because　she　was　not　a　student.　But　what　about　this　man　Jeweled　Lute　had　wanted　her　to　go　with？

What　exactly　did　the　man　want？What　would　he　pay　for？She　supposed　he　wanted　to　touch　her　as　the　man　in　Chungking　had　touched　Jeweled　Lute.　One　thing　was　quite　clear　to　her:she　was　a　humble　person.　She　had　better　recognize　that　and　be　resigned.　She　was　like　a　chair　or　a　table,　which　could　be　bought　and　sold.

She　remembered　how　her　mother　said　sometimes　after　she　had　a　drink,　“You　can　do　as　you　like,　but　one　day　I'll　sell　you　to　some　rich　man."　Why　did　her　mother　want　to　sell　her？Did　Mrs.　Fang　want　to　sell　her　because　she　didn't　earn　enough　money　for　the　family？Perhaps　it　was　because　Mrs.　Fang　was　not　her　real　mother.　Real　parents　wouldn't　sell　their　daughter.　But　where　were　her　parents？How　had　the　Fangs　bought　her？She　began　to　weep　softly.

She　did　not　want　to　tell　Pao　Ching　what　had　happened.　But　perhaps　it　would　be　best　to　ask　him　outright　if　he　was　going　to　sell　her.　He　had　said　so　many　times　that　he　wanted　to　find　her　a　good　husband.　Was　there　a　difference　between　finding　a　husband　and　selling　her？Something　her　mother　said　so　often　flamed　in　her　mind　like　a　sign　in　electric　bulbs:“You　little　bitch.　You're　not　worth　a　cent　apart　from　your　bottom."　And　that　was　what　a　girl　gave　away　whether　she　was　married　or　sold.

For　days　she　brooded.　Her　face　changed.　Furrows　appeared　on　her　young　brow.　Pao　Ching　noticed　something　was　wrong,　but　whenever　he　asked　her　she　gave　him　a　bright　short　smile,　and　said　she　was　quite　well.

She　had　decided　she　could　not　tell　him　her　troubles.　He　was　her　father,　and　he　would　not　understand.　Her　unhappiness　was　her　own.　From　now　on,　she　must　be　grown_up　and　independent.　She　would　tell　her　father　nothing　more.　She　stood　up　and　walked　over　to　the　mirror.　She　was　growing.　She　smiled　as　she　raised　herself　on　the　balls　of　her　feet.　Yes,　she　was　a　woman　now,　and　she　must　understand　the　relations　between　man　and　woman,　even　if　she　had　to　find　out　for　herself.

Pao　Ching　was　so　worried　over　the　change　in　Lotus　Charm　that　he　told　his　troubles　to　his　wife,　who　had　been　sober　for　several　days.　“Of　course,"　she　commented.　“Didn't　you　know,　a　girl　changes　all　the　time."

“But　she's　so　different;　as　if　she　has　all　the　troubles　in　the　world."

Mrs.　Fang　made　a　face　as　if　she　didn't　want　to　talk　about　the　subject　any　more,　but　he　went　on.　“I　wish　you　would　show　her　a　little　kindness,　and　help　her."

“And　when　am　I　not　kind　to　her？"　snapped　Mrs.　Fang.

Pao　Ching　left　her　then.　He　did　not　want　to　start　a　row,　and　his　wife　never　remembered　all　the　unpleasant　things　she　said　to　Lotus　Charm　when　she　was　drunk.

One　day　Mrs.　Fang　came　rolling　in　to　talk　to　Pao　Ching.　“You　know　what　I　think？"　she　cried.　“Lotus　Charm　wants　a　man.　She's　grown_up　now,　and　when　a　girl　gets　that　way　anything　can　happen　to　her,　unless　she　gets　a　man.　She　needs　one　badly　—　I　know,　I　was　a　girl　once."

Pao　Ching　looked　shocked.　“I　tell　you　she's　only　fifteen,"　he　said,　and　he　made　himself　smile.　“And　she's　not　a　bad　girl.　She　doesn't　know　anything."

Mrs.　Fang　pointed　her　finger　at　her　husband's　nose.　“Silly,　if　we　want　to　make　some　money　for　our　old　age,　we　should　sell　her　to　a　rich　man.　We　could　get　at　least　ten　thousand　dollars.　If　you　don't　want　to　do　that,　then　let　her　stay　here　and　earn　money　singing,　but　get　her　a　man　or　there　will　be　trouble."　Pao　Ching　was　disgusted.　He　walked　out.

A　few　days　later　Pao　Ching　had　a　visitor,　a　tall　handsome　man　in　smartly　cut　civilian　clothes.　He　introduced　himself　as　Sergeant　Tao.　There　was　a　pistol　in　his　belt.　He　bowed　courteously,　and　said　he　had　business　with　Pao　Ching.

They　went　to　a　tea　house　to　talk,　Pao　Ching　wondering　what　the　young　man　wanted　and　feeling　inwardly　that　this　business　might　be　distasteful.

Sergeant　Tao　sipped　his　tea　and　smiled.　“I　am　a　northerner　like　you,"　he　said,　“so　we　are　brothers."　His　smile　was　bland.　Pao　Ching　replied　by　ordering　some　food,　his　way　of　showing　courtesy　to　a　fellow　northerner.　Over　the　dishes　they　talked　of　their　homeland.　All　the　time　Pao　Ching　was　wondering　what　the　sergeant　had　at　the　back　of　his　mind.

Finally　the　bland　smile　on　Sergeant　Tao's　face　faded　a　trifle.　His　big　black　eyes　fixed　Pao　Ching.　His　mouth　spread　in　a　little　grin　of　triumph.　“Big　Boss　Fang,"　he　announced,　“I　work　for　Commander　Wang."

Pao　Ching　showed　no　sign　of　the　perturbation　that　was　inside　him.　Without　raising　an　eyelid　he　asked　casually,　“Which　Commander　Wang？There　are　so　many."

The　sergeant　looked　unhappy.　Obviously　he　thought　everyone　knew　his　lord　and　master.　“He　was　a　commander　about　twenty　years　back,"　he　explained.　“Now　he's　the　big　man　in　this　town.　He　lives　in　a　mansion　over　there."　His　hand　pointed　to　the　hills.　“It's　a　magnificent　place.　You　should　walk　out　and　see　it."

“Indeed　I　will."

Sergeant　Tao　smiled.　“The　commander　heard　you　sing　the　other　night."

“Really,　I　am　sorry　I　did　not　recognize　him　and　pay　him　my　personal　compliments.　But　I　am　a　stranger　here,　and　my　eyesight　is　not　good."

“He's　very　informal.　He　likes　to　go　out　without　any　ceremony.　The　richer　he　gets　the　more　informal　he　is.　He's　that　kind　of　man."　The　sergeant　put　his　elbow　on　the　table,　and　he　thrust　his　plump　sleek　face　over　to　Pao　Ching.　“Big　Boss　Fang,"　he　whispered,　“the　commander　likes　your　Lotus　Charm."

Pao　Ching's　smile　froze　for　a　second,　as　Sergeant　Tao　continued.　“He　sent　me　here　to　discuss　terms　with　you."

Pao　Ching　coughed.　The　sergeant　took　that　as　a　sign　that　he　was　going　to　hold　out　for　a　good　price.　“He　has　money,　and　he　likes　to　spend　it.　He'll　take　care　of　you,　and　her.　He's　a　kind_hearted　man.　Make　no　mistake　about　that."

Pao　Ching's　face　became　a　shade　paler,　but　he　contrived　a　smile.　“My　dear　sergeant,"　he　said　casually,　but　with　a　hint　of　authority,　“don't　you　know　that　it　is　illegal　to　buy　and　sell　human　beings　these　days？"

“Who　wants　to　buy　her？Commander　Wang　wants　to　marry　her.　He'll　treat　you　right,　of　course.　If　you　want　a　house,　some　property　or　a　loan　that　doesn't　have　to　be　paid　back,　he'll　see　that　you　get　it.　But　it　will　be　a　proper　marriage.　No　buying　or　selling　—　a　marriage　to　a　distinguished　person."

Pao　Ching　made　it　obvious　that　he　was　unimpressed.　With　a　vestige　of　a　smile　he　remarked,　“Did　you　say　he　was　a　commander　twenty　years　ago？"

“Sure　I　did.　He's　only　fifty_five　now,　very　healthy,　and　strong　as　a　lion."

“Just　about　fifteen　years　older　than　I　am."　Pao　Ching's　tone　was　sarcastic.

The　sergeant　laughed　confidently.　“If　people　only　knew　what　love　and　care　an　older　man　can　give　to　a　girl.　Don't　you　realize　that,　my　fellow　northerner？It's　good　for　both　of　them."

“How　many　concubines　does　he　have？"　inquired　Pao　Ching.

“Only　five.　And　he　always　gives　most　attention　to　the　latest　and　youngest."

Pao　Ching　reddened　then.　He　was　furious.　With　an　effort　he　managed　to　control　himself.　He　had　traveled　widely,　meeting　all　kinds　of　people,　and　had　learned　to　keep　calm.　He　sipped　his　tea,　aware　that　his　hand　was　shaking.

“My　dear　fellow　northerner,"　he　said　in　a　benign　authoritative　voice,　“you　are　making　a　mistake.　I　am　not　a　typical　entertainer,　and　I　don't　do　what　other　show　people　do.　Lotus　Charm　has　been　making　money　for　the　family　many　years　now.　I　treat　her　as　my　own　child,　to　reply　her　and　my　own　conscience.　I　don't　want　to　make　money　out　of　her　in　the　way　you　suggest.　Now　you　are　an　intelligent　fellow,　and　a　northerner　like　myself,　so　you　should　understand.　Please　make　that　clear　to　your　commander."

Sergeant　Tao's　face　was　set　rigid.　His　mouth　snapped　as　he　said,　“But　Mrs.　Fang　said　she　agreed.　She　also　quoted　me　a　price."

“Really,　and　when　did　you　discuss　this　with　her？"

“Yesterday.　I　called　when　you　were　out."

“Was　she　drunk？"

“I　wouldn't　say　that　about　any　lady."

“Then　be　assured　that　whatever　she　told　you,　was　when　she　was　in　her　cups.　Drunken　words　have　no　value."

Pao　Ching　spoke　sternly.　He　stared　thoughtfully　into　space.　The　sergeant　interrupted.　“Drunken　words　or　no　drunken　words,　what　shall　I　tell　the　commander？"

“I　suggest,　my　dear　fellow　northerner,　that　you　give　me　time　to　discuss　the　matter　with　my　wife.　One　day　or　so.　Then　I　shall　give　you　a　formal　reply."　Pao　Ching　bowed.　“May　I　engage　a　litter　for　you."

“Thanks,　no.　My　own　is　waiting.　Commander　Wang　treats　me　right."

Pao　Ching　gripped　the　sergeant's　limp　fat　hand.　“My　dear　fellow　northerner,"　he　murmured　courteously,　and　forgot　what　he　had　intended　to　say.

Sergeant　Tao　bowed　and　stood　up.　“I'll　see　you　tomorrow　and　be　sure　I　won't　make　trouble　for　you.　I　have　to　do　my　duty."

“That,　I　understand.　A　soldier　has　his　duty."

The　sergeant　lowered　his　voice.　“Please　remember,　Commander　Wang　has　power,　so　be　careful.　I　don't　want　to　scare　you,　but　after　all,　we　are　fellow　countrymen,　so　I　should　tell　you　certain　things."

“Thank　you,　fellow　countryman,　your　kindness　is　deeply　appreciated."

After　Sergeant　Tao　had　gone　Pao　Ching　sat　down　at　the　table　again,　lost　in　thought.　His　first　impulse　was　to　go　home　and　give　Mrs.　Fang　a　severe　beating.　She　deserved　it.　But　what　good　would　come　of　that？It　would　only　make　her　worse.　He　got　up,　and　walked　out　of　town　along　the　brook.　He　walked　fast,　his　eyes　down,　his　hand　clasped　tightly　behind　him.　Losing　one's　temper　was　no　good.　A　man　lost　face　when　he　quarreled　with　his　wife.

For　half　an　hour　he　walked.　Here　was　serious　trouble.　This　Commander　Wang　was　the　big　man　of　the　district.　He　was　powerful.　If　he　didn't　get　Lotus　Charm,　he　might　take　vengeance　on　the　family.　Pao　Ching　shuddered.　He　was　at　the　mercy　of　a　tyrant.　Wang　had　only　to　dispatch　one　of　his　hired　killers　and　then　he　would　no　longer　be　alive　to　protect　his　family.

He　turned　back.　At　the　hotel　door,　he　made　his　decision.　He　went　to　find　Useless　Fang,　sitting　in　the　yard　contemplating　the　sky.　They　both　went　to　the　bank　of　the　stream　and　sat　under　a　weeping　willow　tree.





