Chapter　Twenty


WANG　THE　THIRD　had　become　prosperous.He　now　owned　three　pieces　of　property　—　three　compounds.Although　his　appearance，his　dress，and　his　manner　had　not　changed，his　heart　was　different　from　what　it　had　been.He　was　no　longer　one　of　those　who　grasped　for　food　on　the　side　of　the　street.He　was　now　a　member　of　the　small　gentry　and　had　some　dignity.　Although　he　still　sat　in　the　tea　shops　every　day　small　contracts　were　of　no　interest　to　him.When　he　was　with　those　of　his　own　walk　of　life，he　would　sit　apart　with　his　back　straight　as　if　to　say，“For　little　affairs　don't　bother　me.For　the　sake　of　three　grains　of　sesame　and　two　dates，Wang　the　Third　will　not　trouble　to　move　his　legs.”

His　manner　toward　those　who　wanted　to　sell　or　buy　houses　was　also　different　from　what　it　had　been.　As　soon　as　he　saw　a　customer　he　would　say，“I　also　have　property，”and　he　would　have　liked　to　add，“Don't　think　I　am　an　ordinary　go-between　who　will　come　when　you　beckon　and　go　when　you　wave　your　hand.Heng　—　I　have　my　dignity！”

He　had　not　forgotten　that　the　Japanese　had　ruined　the　family　of　his　relatives，the　Chiens，yet　he　could　not　overlook　the　fact　that　from　the　time　the　Japanese　had　come　to　Peiping　he　had　had　more　business，so　much　more　that　he　now　owned　property　himself.For　the　sake　of　Mr.Chien　he　should　hate　the　Japanese，but　for　his　own　sake　he　should　be　grateful　to　them.Since　these　conflicting　points　of　view　could　not　be　resolved　they　could　only　be　kept　in　balance.

Gradually　this　balance　could　no　longer　be　maintained.A　balance　is　the　beginning　of　slipping　to　one　side　or　the　other.

Because　he　wanted　to　protect　his　property　forever，he　could　not　help　believing　what　the　Japanese　said　in　their　propaganda，that　the　Japanese　were　not　there　to　fight　the　Chinese　but　to　help　the　Chinese　be　rid　of　the　communists.Wang　the　Third　thought　inside　his　square　head　that　if　the　Japanese　should　really　destroy　the　communists　it　would　be　equal　to　protecting　his　three　houses.

He　thought　constantly　of　his　in-law，Mr.Chien.Whether　he　was　walking　on　the　streets　or　sitting　in　the　tea　shops　his　eyes　were　always　on　the　watch，hoping　to　see　the　man　he　so　much　admired.Whenever　he　saw　one　that　looked　like　his　relative　he　would　rush　over　hoping　that　he　had　not　seen　wrong，and　when　he　saw　that　it　was　not　Mr.Chien　he　would　rub　his　eyes　and　scold　himself　for　an　old　man　whose　eyesight　was　no　longer　sure.

He　loved　his　grandson　so　much　that　he　almost　spoiled　him.While　Mr.Chien　was　suffering　the　greatest　hardships　the　grandson　was　smothered　with　love　and　indulgence.　Wang　the　Third　himself　ate　Republic　flour　and　drank　poor　tea，but　he　used　all　means　to　get　better　food　and　drink　for　the　child.If　the　child　had　a　bit　of　headache　or　a　little　fever　he　would　invite　the　best　doctor　in　Peiping.To　make　the　child　happy　and　comfortable　was　practically　his　religion.

When　young　Mrs.Chien　wanted　to　punish　the　child，Wang　the　Third　would　hold　him　in　his　arms　and　say　with　his　attitude，“You　are　fortunate　to　have　a　child　like　this　and　yet　you　want　to　punish　him！If　you　did　not　have　him　what　would　you　be？”

As　soon　as　the　child　learned　to　walk　Wang　the　Third　believed　that　he　should　see　the　world.With　the　child　on　his　shoulder　or　on　his　neck，with　his　chest　stuck　out　and　taking　long　strides，he　would　go　and　see　the　sights　on　the　streets，visit　the　temple　fairs　and　the　market　places.No　matter　whether　it　was　good　to　eat　or　not，whether　it　was　suitable　for　the　child　to　play　with　or　not，if　only　the　child　said，“Ah，ah，”Wang　the　Third　would　quickly　take　out　the　money　and　buy　it　for　him.

When，however，the　child　could　say　many　things　Wang　the　Third　was　in　trouble.The　child　learned　from　his　mother　to　say，“Down　with　the　Japanese，”and　“Avenge　my　father，”and　also　he　would　stick　out　his　little　chest　and　say，“My　surname　is　Chien.”Wang　the　Third　could　not　take　around　with　him　a　grandson　who　shouted　at　all　times，“Down　with　the　Japanese，”nor　could　he　quarrel　with　his　daughter；the　neighbors　might　hear　and　tell　the　Japanese.He　did　not　fear　arrest.His　body　was　strong　enough　to　take　a　few　blows，but　suppose　the　Japanese　should　confiscate　his　property.

Inside　his　square　head　Wang　the　Third　decided　he　must　find　a　way　to　be　closer　to　the　Japanese.This　did　not　mean　that　he　wanted　to　become　a　collaborator　or　a　running　dog.No，he　was　not　that　low；　he　wanted　only　to　come　not　too　far　and　not　too　near　—　in　order　to　make　himself　secure.

He　joined　the　Society　of　the　Three　Purities.The　Society　of　the　Three　Purities　was　an　organization　for　gathering　talented　people　and　people　of　some　ability　like　Wang　the　Third　who　were　not　very　clear　in　their　thinking.　The　Japanese　soon　classified　him　as　a　“useful　man，”　and　wanted　to　make　friends　with　him.

After　they　had　made　Wang　the　Third　believe　they　were　well-intentioned　people，the　Japanese　suddenly　mentioned　the　poet，Mr.Chien，to　him.Wang　the　Third　was　stunned.The　words　of　the　Japanese　were　put　together　from　the　grains　of　sesame　he　had　scattered.The　Japanese　immediately　guaranteed　him　that　they　would　not　hurt　Mr.Chien.On　the　contrary，they　admired　Mr.Chien's　learning，his　character　and　courage，just　as　much　as　Wang　the　Third　admired　his　relative.They　wanted　to　find　him，and　forgive　him，and　become　his　friend.Wang　the　Third　must　help　them.They　also　hinted　to　him　that　if　he　were　unwilling　to　help　them　—　heng！　—　his　three　houses　and　his　grandchild　would　no　longer　be　safe.

He　had　been　a　smart　man　all　his　life　but　now　Wang　the　Third　had　fallen　into　a　trap.　His　always　red　and　bright　nose　became　purple.He　became　angry.He　would　not　help　the　Japanese　to　catch　Mr.Chien　even　if　they　said　they　would　not　hurt　him.

Thinking　and　thinking　Wang　the　Third　thought　of　a　plan.He　would　go　to　find　Mr.Chien　and　ask　him　for　a　plan.

But　where　would　he　go　to　find　Mr.Chien？

He　remembered　Scholar　Yeh.　It　had　been　a　long　time　since　he　had　seen　that　thin　fellow，who　had　also　been　concerned　with　Mr.Chien.

But　he　drew　a　blank.The　neighbors　of　Scholar　Yeh　told　him　that　the　whole　family　had　disappeared.

Wang　the　Third　thought　of　Rey　Shuan.

The　ears　of　the　whole　Chi　family　stood　up.They　all　wanted　to　know　how　the　young　Mrs.Chien　and　her　child　were　faring.

But　Wang　the　Third　could　not　take　time　to　talk　about　his　daughter　and　his　grandson.He　asked　immediately　for　Mr.Chien's　whereabouts.

At　first　Rey　Shuan　thought　it　must　be　anxiety　for　Mr.Chien　that　made　Wang　the　Third　so　anxious　to　know　where　he　was，but　after　a　while　he　saw　that　something　was　wrong　and　began　to　question　Wang　the　Third.

Wang　the　Third　was　so　impatient　he　constantly　knocked　the　bowl　of　his　pipe，but　determined　not　to　tell　the　truth.Rey　Shuan　also　decided　to　be　cautious　and　not　to　give　any　information.Finally，depressed　and　disappointed，Wang　the　Third　went　away.

Rey　Shuan　felt　uneasy.He　did　not　know　why　Wang　the　Third　wanted　to　find　Mr.Chien　but　he　began　to　see　danger.He　wanten　to　go　at　once　and　warn　Mr.Chien，but　on　second　thought　he　felt　that　he　was　letting　himself　be　greatly　frightened　by　a　small　matter.How　could　he　go　and　frighten　Mr.Chien　when　there　was　no　wind　or　breakers　three　feet　high.Wang　the　Third　and　Mr.Chien　were，after　all，fathers　of　a　son　and　a　daughter　who　had　married.

He　decided　to　wait，to　wait　until　he　gave　the　manuscripts　to　the　monk，Clear　Moon，and　first　discuss　the　matter　with　him.

But　Wang　the　Third，seeing　that　Rey　Shuan's　mouth　was　so　close，also　suspected　Rey　Shuan.　He　thought　that　Rey　Shuan　knew　where　Mr.Chien　was　but　purposely　refused　to　tell　him.He　decided　to　shadow　Rey　Shuan.

He　discovered　that　Rey　Shuan　met　Clear　Moon　in　a　little　shop，and　then　Wang　the　Third　followed　the　monk，Clear　Moon，and　discovered　the　little　temple.

Wang　the　Third　did　not　dare　enter　the　little　temple.Suppose　Mr.Chien　were　really　there　and　he　went　in　to　persuade　him　to　surrender，and　then　suppose　Mr.Chien　would　not　listen　to　his　persuasions　but　should　move　and　hide　somewhere　else　—

On　the　other　hand　could　he　—　because　Mr.Chien　refused　to　listen　to　him　—　heartlessly　inform　the　Japanese　to　come　and　arrest　him？

When　he　had　gone　to　see　Rey　Shuan　he　had　seen　the　houses　Number　One　and　Number　Three　in　the　Little　Sheep　Fold，and　had　remembered　how，years　ago，he　had　gone　to　see　Morning　Lotus　behind　Mr.Chien's　back.Now　was　he　himself　to　become　a　Morning　Lotus？The　people　of　the　Kuan　family　were　a　pack　of　dogs；Wang　the　Third　was　a　good　Son　of　Han.

But　if　his　Chien　in-law　were　really　in　the　temple　and　he　did　not　inform　the　Japanese　would　he　not　have　the　guilt　of　protecting　his　relative，and　he　and　all　his　property　would　be　involved.

His　conscience　and　the　evil　in　his　mind　were　locked　in　struggle；neither　would　give　a　step.War　was　the　criminal　that　was　forcing　his　conscience　to　think　only　of　his　own　security，and　to　sell　his　relative.

He　frequently　stood　in　the　neighborhood　of　the　little　temple　but　dared　not　go　in.He　wanted　to　see　the　relative　and　friend　he　most　admired，but　he　was　also　afraid　that　if　he　went　in　and　saw　Mr.Chien　he　would　be　scolded.

While　he　hesitated　outside　the　little　temple　others　shadowed　him.He　dared　not　go　inside　the　temple　but　those　others　secretly　went　in.

And　Mr.Chien　was　arrested.





