24


The　wheel　of　fortune　brought　good　luck　to　Jeweled　Lute.　The　turmoil　of　wartime　had　turned　the　social　structure　of　the　nation　upside　down.　Intellectuals　and　government　officials　became　poor,　and　the　laborer　was　exalted.　The　middle　class　of　China　was　now　the　poorest,　bound　in　the　fetters　of　poverty　by　inflation.

At　the　top　of　the　social　structure　were　the　black　market　merchants,　the　grafters　and　smugglers,　and　those　engaged　in　business　at　tremendous　profits.　They　were　the　salt　of　the　new　society.　They　had　money　without　culture,　and　they　made　more　money　as　their　less　fortunate　neighbors　became　poorer.

One　of　these　men　was　Gold　Tooth　Lee,　a　rickshaw　man　who　had　turned　truck　driver　and　had　made　a　fortune.　He　had　a　huge　imported　truck　and　carried　freight　for　the　government.　For　every　three　tons　of　government　freight　for　which　he　was　paid　at　the　official　rate,　he　carried　half　a　ton　of　his　own　merchandise　to　sell　at　black　market　prices.　In　a　short　time　he　became　fabulously　rich.　Inflation　meant　nothing　to　him,　for　he　always　had　money　to　burn.　He　had　so　much　money　that　it　seemed　ridiculous　to　do　anything　but　spend　it.　And　spend　it　he　did.　He　wore　expensive　American　clothes　and　bought　himself　a　ten_thousand_dollar　watch.　In　the　breast　pocket　of　his　lavender_hued　suit　he　carried　four　expensive　American　fountain　pens,　although　he　could　not　write　a　word.　Sometimes　he　thought　he　should　have　five　to　demonstrate　his　wealth.　If　other　people　carried　one,　he　should　have　five.　The　pens　were　his　portable　capital.　If　he　had　a　bad　day　at　the　gambling　tables　and　lost　everything,　he　would　put　up　two　of　the　pens　as　security　against　a　loan.　The　pens　were　worth　a　fortune,　since　everyone　wanted　them.

Gold　Tooth　Lee　was　a　product　of　Republic　China.　He　had　to　have　the　best,　even　if　his　neighbors　had　nothing.　His　pocket　hand_kerchief　was　of　hard_printed　Indian　silk,　and　he　carried　a　gold　cigarette　case　filled　with　Russian　and　American　cigarettes.　He　had　a　wardrobe　full　of　suits,　although　the　average　citizen　often　had　not　a　single　decent　pair　of　pants　to　cover　his　half_starved　loins.　He　plastered　his　black　hair　back　with　brilliantine　from　Paris,　paid　for　at　the　rate　of　fifty　American　dollars　per　bottle.　To　hide　the　smell　of　sweet　caused　by　his　exertions　at　the　wheel　of　his　truck,　he　doused　his　body　with　eau　de　cologne.　The　price　of　a　single　bottle　would　feed　a　hundred　children　for　a　month　or　more.　On　his　body　he　carried　more　wealth　than　many　a　genuine　American　millionaire.

When　he　ate　he　spent　enough　on　the　restaurant　check　to　keep　an　average　family　for　two　weeks.　Each　night　he　hired　a　woman　to　sleep　with,　and　gave　her　enough　money　to　live　for　a　year.　When　he　gambled　his　stakes　were　thousand　dollar　bills.　Smaller　bills　were　too　much　trouble　to　pick　up.　Each　time　he　went　to　Burma　he　would　buy　a　few　fountain　pens　and　a　case　or　two　of　brandy,　and　have　enough　to　spend　for　a　month.

But　he　was　not　entirely　happy.　There　was　after　all　a　future,　and　a　man　had　to　make　plans.　His　plan　was　to　buy　a　few　trucks　for　himself　and　operate　his　own　transportation　company.　This　would　bring　him　fat　profits　without　his　having　to　work.　He　also　felt　that　he　would　like　to　settle　down,　and　concentrate　his　attention　on　one　woman.　Having　a　different　woman　each　night　was　expensive　and　exhausting,since　having　paid　her,　he　felt　obliged　to　have　his　money's　worth.　Perhaps　it　would　be　better　in　every　way　to　get　married,　and　have　the　same　woman　at　home.

And　who　would　be　more　suitable　than　Jeweled　Lute　the　singer,　whom　he　had　seen　several　times　in　the　drum_singing　theater.　There　was　a　girl.　He　had　tried　her　at　the　cost　of　a　thousand　dollar　bill,　and　she　had　given　him　something　to　remember.　Also,　she　had　shown　him　that　she　knew　how　to　spend　money.　Wasn't　that　just　what　he　needed？　He　had　thought　so　hard　about　new　ways　to　get　rid　of　money　that　his　head　ached.

Everything　about　Jeweled　Lute　pleased　him.　He　appreciated　her　bedroom　tricks.　She　always　knew　what　he　wanted　and　when　he　wanted　it.　She　liked　to　eat,　and　she　had　a　name　that　was　emblazoned　on　the　theater　billboards.　No　one　ever　heard　his　name;　marrying　Jeweled　Lute　would　give　him　social　prestige.

Gold　Tooth　Lee　had　reckoned,　however,　without　Fourth　Master　Tang,　the　bride's　father.　Fourth　Master　knew　a　rich　man　when　he　saw　one,　and　surely　a　man　with　four　fountain　pens　must　have　more　money　than　he　could　ever　spend.　Fourth　Master　knew　also　that　there　is　no　limit　to　what　a　man　will　pay　when　he　wants　a　woman.　And　Fourth　Master　had　a　woman　to　sell-a　woman　whose　name　was　in　the　papers　every　day,　a　woman　who　could　sing　with　the　best.

He　asked　Gold　Tooth　Lee　for　a　million　dollars　in　cash,　and　a　new　American　truck.　The　money　might　be　worth　nothing　in　a　matter　of　hours,　but　the　value　of　the　truck　would　go　up.　Gold　Tooth　the　truck　driver　agreed.　Why,　a　truck　was　a　very　small　matter　between　friends.　Since　Fourth　Master　Tang　had　got　the　promise　of　a　truck　so　readily,　his　crafty　greedy　mind　thought　up　something　else.　Would　his　future　son_in_law　give　him　a　job　as　adviser　and　business　manager　in　the　new　trucking　concern？　That　meant　a　regular　salary　with　no　work.　Why　sure,　said　Gold　Tooth.　Anything　he　wanted.　Fourth　Master　Tang　was　almost　disappointed.　Everything　was　coming　too　easily.　He　should　have　asked　for　two　trucks　in　the　first　place,　and　twice　the　money.　Would　Gold　Tooth　assure　him　of　a　regular　supply　of　ten　ounces　of　opium　each　month　—　for　his　rheumatism？　The　truck　driver　flipped　the　air　with　his　hand　in　a　contemptuous　gesture.　Sure,　that　was　easy.　But　when　Fourth　Master　Tang　suggested　that　he　appoint　him　as　guardian　of　all　his　savings,　with　power　of　attorney　in　case　anything　happened　to　him,　Gold　Tooth　said　no.　Didn't　Fourth　Master　Tang　know　that　the　girl　was　his　anyway？　Fourth　Master　Tang　signed　the　marriage　license,　feeling　with　all　sincerity　that　he　was　being　scandalously　cheated　of　his　rights.

The　wedding　was　held　in　the　biggest　restaurant　in　Chung_king.　Gold　Tooth　insisted　on　a　formal　ceremony　although　he　had　been　sleeping　with　Jeweled　Lute　at　a　thousand　dollars　a　time　right　up　to　the　wedding　day.　What　did　money　matter　anyhow,　a　wedding　was　a　thing　to　remember.　As　for　Jeweled　Lute,　she　was　delighted.　Never　had　she　imagined　that　she　would　be　a　bride　at　a　formal　wedding.

Jeweled　Lute　asked　Lotus　Charm　to　be　her　bridesmaid.　At　first　Lotus　Charm　refused.　She　was　too　miserable,　but　gradually　she　realized　that　Jeweled　Lute　was　being　kind.　The　girl　really　liked　her.　There　were　many　girls　who　could　have　been　asked,　but　Jeweled　Lute　had　asked　her.　When　Jeweled　Lute　noticed　her　hesitating　she　clutched　her　by　the　arm　and　looked　at　her　appealingly.　She　spoke　with　tears　in　her　voice,　“Lotus　Charm,　please　come.　Now　that　I　am　to　be　married,　come　and　be　my　bridesmaid.　I　know　I　am　a　loose　woman,　and　you　are　clean　and　pure,　but　please　come.　Let　me　have　the　satisfaction　of　knowing　that　there　will　be　one　virgin　at　the　ceremony,　and　she　will　be　my　bridesmaid.　You　know　what　they　say　about　that　—　it　means　good　luck.　Please　give　me　good　luck　for　my　marriage."

The　baby　in　Lotus　Charm's　stomach　gave　a　slight　kick.　Lotus　Charm　felt　a　wicked　cheat,　but　she　promised　to　be　bridesmaid.

The　great　ceremony　took　place,　and　the　ritual　and　the　decorations　were　symbolic　of　the　era.　Every　part　of　the　world　seemed　to　be　represented,　including　darkest　Africa.　The　room　reserved　for　the　occasion　was　hung　with　silk　and　satin　scrolls　of　every　description.　The　colors　were　so　bright　and　so　many　that　looking　at　them　made　one　dizzy.　The　orchestra　had　been　hired　from　a　local　circus.　Their　music　was　the　kind　that　accompanied　a　magician's　producing　rabbits　out　of　a　hat　or　pigeons　from　his　sleeves.　There　was　even　a　piece　written　especially　for　a　man　doing　an　act　on　the　flying　trapeze.　If　the　guests　were　amused,　certainly　the　bridegroom　saw　nothing　wrong.　Music　was　music,　and　the　bigger　the　orchestra　the　better　the　music.　That　made　sense　to　him.

He　dressed　for　the　wedding　with　great　care,　and　the　help　of　two　hired　valets.　His　suit　was　a　black　and　white　check　of　bold　design.　He　wore　a　high　wing　collar　with　a　red　and　yellow　tie　of　silk　imported　from　India.　In　his　pocket　were　the　four　famous　fountain　pens,　worth　a　million　dollars　at　current　exchange　rates.　He　wore　black　knee_length　riding　boots,　polished　to　mirror　brightness,　which　he　had　bought　from　an　English　Army　officer,　complete　with　silver　spurs　which　jangled　when　he　walked.　In　his　buttonhole　he　wore　a　huge　white　flower　made　of　feathers,　with　the　word　“Bridegroom"　written　on　a　silk　scroll　beneath　it.

Jeweled　Lute　decided　to　put　on　everything　a　lady　should　wear.　Underneath　her　white　silk　imported　wedding　gown,　which　her　husband　had　brought　from　Burma,　she　wore　three　sets　of　underclothing,　a　girdle,　panties,　and　yards　of　ribbons.　On　the　top　of　her　white　veil　she　had　pinned　a　colored　silk　handkerchief,　and　everywhere　about　her　was　jewelry.　She　was　wearing　every　piece　of　imitation　jewelry　she　owned,　and　a　lot　of　new　pieces,　some　with　real　diamonds　that　the　bridegroom　had　given　her.　Her　large　bosom　was　encased　in　a　brassiere　and　smothered　with　glittering　gems.　There　was　at　least　one　ring　on　every　finger　of　her　hands,　and　her　right　arm　was　covered　from　wrist　to　elbow　with　diamond　bracelets.　In　her　arms　she　carried　a　bunch　of　plum　blossoms,　long_stemmed　and　fragrant.　But　there　were　so　many　blossoms　that　she　appeared　to　be　carrying　a　small　tree;　and　because　she　felt　it　was　proper　for　a　bride　to　be　decorated　with　the　emblem　of　purity,　she　refused　to　put　down　the　tree　for　even　a　moment.

Most　of　the　guests　were　from　the　trucking　business　and　from　the　city's　vaudeville　circles-the　friends　of　the　Tang　family.　Or　rather,　their　enemies,　who　came　to　get　a　free　meal　and　smokes.　Fourth　Master　had　given　glowing　stories　of　the　bridegroom's　wealth　and　his　unending　supply　of　American　cigarettes.　And　American　cigarettes　were　worth　a　small　fortune.　Who　wouldn't　come　to　a　wedding　where　they　would　be　free？

As　the　orchestra　played　the　piece　that　usually　accompanied　the　rabbit's　coming　out　of　the　hat,　the　wedding　party　stepped　on　the　stage.　Fourth　Master　Tang　was　in　his　glory.　He　had　washed　the　stains　of　opium_smoking　off　his　face　and　shaved　himself.　His　little　pig　eyes　were　lit　with　delight,　and　his　thin　mouth　was　smiling　under　his　big　sharp　nose.　What　a　day！　To　sell　his　daughter　for　real　money！　The　dream　of　his　life　had　come　true.

Mrs.　Tang　looked　like　a　small　hillock　covered　with　spring　blossoms,　in　her　multicolored　embroidered　gown.　At　second　glance　she　looked　like　a　camouflaged　ship　at　sea,　the　colors　so　arranged　that　you　could　not　see　which　way　she　was　going.　She　had　tucked　herself　into　the　dress　with　great　difficulty　and　she　was　short　of　breath,　but　full　of　her　own　importance.　When　a　few　children　got　in　her　way　as　she　waddled　up　the　steps　to　the　stage,　she　pinched　their　ears　and　swore　in　ripe　theatrical　language.

Lotus　Charm　was　dressed　in　a　simple　pink　frock.　She　carried　a　bouquet　of　country　flowers,　and　smiled　prettily　as　she　walked.　Some　of　the　people　applauded　as　if　she　were　making　an　entrance　on　the　stage.　But　she　did　not　seem　to　see　them,　keeping　her　head　high　and　walking　with　maidenly　modesty,　her　hips　hardly　moving.　She　was　like　a　simple　flower,　a　supreme　work　of　nature,　in　the　midst　of　this　over_dressed　artificial　assembly.

Then　came　the　bride　and　bridegroom　—　Jeweled　Lute　swinging　her　hips　and　clanging　her　bracelets,　the　bridegroom　prancing　at　her　side,　in　a　kind　of　goose　step　to　show　off　his　riding　boots　and　silver　spurs.

Their　appearance　brought　the　crowd　to　enthusiasm.　Gold　Tooth　had　arranged　for　his　friends　to　cheer,　and　they　did　with　gusto.　Some　clapped　their　hands,　others　showered　the　happy　couple　with　beans　and　confetti.　When　the　couple　faced　each　other　at　the　end　of　the　ceremony,　everyone　roared　“Kiss！"　in　unison.　So　they　kissed-the　personification　of　love　purified　by　a　public　declaration.

Meanwhile　the　bridegroom　had　bestowed　a　ring　and　a　pair　of　diamond　bracelets　on　his　bride,　and　had　thrown　in　one　of　his　de　luxe　American　pens　as　a　kind　of　bonus.

The　principal　witness,　one　of　the　strong_arm　men　of　the　city's　underworld,　then　delivered　a　speech　in　honor　of　newly_weds.　His　discourse　was　far　from　high_minded,　but　it　drew　rounds　of　applause　and　set　the　key　for　the　bawdy　atmosphere　that　prevailed.　Soon　all　the　guests　were　shouting　at　the　tops　of　their　voices,　demanding　that　the　bridegroom　give　an　account　of　his　love　life　for　their　entertainment.

Lotus　Charm　was　not　feeling　well.　The　baby　was　kicking　inside　her　hurtfully,　and　she　felt　near　to　suffocation　in　the　crowded　stuffy　room.　But　she　was　determined　to　stay　through　the　ceremony　to　do　honor　to　Jeweled　Lute　who　had　so　graciously　invited　her　to　be　bridesmaid.　Soon　beads　of　perspiration　formed　on　her　brow.　She　stood　very　still,　hardly　daring　to　move,　biting　her　lips　to　prevent　herself　from　crying　out.　Then　suddenly　the　room　went　dark　about　her,　and　she　crumbled　on　the　floor.

She　came　to　consciousness　in　her　bedroom.　Her　father　was　sitting　at　her　bedside,　his　face　pale　and　drawn,　his　eyes　glittering　oddly.

For　some　time　he　could　not　speak.　Finally　he　moistened　his　dry　lips.　“Who　was　it？"　he　managed　to　ask.　“Who　was　it？"

She　told　him　quite　simply,　without　any　display　of　emotion.　The　telling　helped　her　calm　herself.　She　felt　happy　now　that　her　secret　was　out,　and　the　baby　leaping　in　her　stomach　seemed　a　most　desirable　person.

Pao　Ching　did　not　scold　her.　He　merely　nodded,　patted　her　shoulder,　and　went　out.　Inwardly　he　was　seething.　That　low　rascal　Chang　Wen.　He　would　eat　him　alive.　This　was　the　lowest,　more　dishonest　thing　a　man　could　do;　low　even　for　a　gangster　like　Chang.　There　was　a　code　among　crooks,　and　Pao　Ching　knew　that　when　money　was　paid　for　a　certain　task,　that　task　was　done,　and　the　man　who　paid　the　money　was　free　from　being　abused.　But　Chang　Wen　had　taken　advantage　of　him,　and　ruined　his　daughter.

He　found　Chang　Wen　in　the　tea　shop　where　he　usually　went　every　afternoon.　The　moment　he　saw　the　young　man's　face　he　knew　that　Lotus　Charm　had　spoken　the　truth.　Chang　smiled　at　him　in　welcome,　but　his　eyes　avoided　Pao　Ching's.

“What　do　you　intend　to　do？"　demanded　Pao　Ching　without　any　preliminary.

“Do　about　what？"　asked　Chang　Wen.　Pao　Ching　lost　control　of　himself.　He　aimed　a　blow　at　the　sleek　grinning　face.　But　Chang　Wen　quickly　moved　out　of　range.　At　the　same　time　his　hand　snapped　to　his　pocket,　and　Pao　Ching　found　himself　staring　into　the　muzzle　of　a　gun.

Chang　Wen's　face　was　contorted　with　hate　and　fear.　“I'll　kill　you　like　a　rat,"　he　said　quietly,　speaking　through　his　teeth,　“if　you　try　anything　with　me　—　you　old　fool."

Pao　Ching　hesitated.　He　drew　a　deep　breath,　and　made　up　his　mind.　With　a　smile　on　his　face　he　said　in　a　loud　voice,　so　everyone　could　hear,　“Go　ahead　and　shoot.　I'm　old.　I　was　earning　my　living　and　traveling　all　over　the　country　before　your　mother　carried　you　in　her　belly."　Then　he　walked　slowly　toward　the　gangster,　his　black　eyes　fixed　on　Chang　Wen's　face.　“Shoot,　little　man　—　shoot."

Chang　Wen's　eyes　bulged　for　a　moment.　He　had　never　been　treated　this　way.　Most　of　the　men　he　threatened　with　his　gun　were　frightened,　and　he　killed　them　without　so　much　as　a　thought.　But　Pao　Ching　was　inviting　him　to　shoot,　daring　him　in　public.　Chang　had　killed　many　men,　but　he　did　not　want　to　murder　a　man　in　cold　blood,　in　front　of　witnesses.

He　lowered　the　gun.　Then　with　his　head　tilted　on　one　side,　he　smiled　at　Pao　Ching.　“How　could　I　kill　my　father_in_law？　I　am　not　that　kind　of　man."

“What　do　you　intend　to　do？"　Pao　Ching　asked　sternly.

“Whatever　you　say,　Boss　Fang."

“Are　you　going　to　marry　her？"

“I　would　if　I　could,　but　that's　not　possible."

“Why　not？"

“That's　my　business,old　man."　Chang　Wen　moved　away　a　step.　He　shrugged　his　shoulders.　“I　just　can't　—　not　while　I　work　for　the　government.　You　know　that."

“Then　you　will　not　come　to　my　house　again."

Chang　Wen　laughed.　He　snapped　his　fingers　and　spat　on　the　floor.　“I'll　come　whenever　I　like."

Pao　Ching　remembered　Chang's　love　for　money.　Perhaps　...　“How　much,"　he　inquired,　watching　the　younger　man　closely,　“how　much　do　you　want？　I　have　money."

“I'll　take　your　money,　old　man,"　laughed　Chang　Wen.　“But　I　want　her　too.　She's　my　girl,　and　she　loves　me.　I'm　the　one　man　in　her　life.　You　ask　her."

Pao　Ching's　heart　went　black　with　rage.　“You　miserable　little　bastard,"　he　cried.　“God　curse　your　mother's　womb."

Chang　Wen　was　amused.　“No　good　swearing,　old　man.　You　had　better　watch　your　step　when　you　deal　with　government　officials.　Your　good　friend　Meng　Liang　found　that　out.　He　thought　he　could　run　away,　but　we　got　him.　What　do　you　think　of　that？　Now　get　this　clear　in　your　head.　That　baby　in　Lotus　Charm　is　mine.　What　I　want　to　do　with　her　is　my　concern,　not　yours.　But　don't　worry.　I'll　be　kind　to　her-and　you　too,　if　you　behave."　He　smoothed　his　patent　leather　hair,　lit　a　cigarette　and　walked　out.

Pao　Ching　went　back　to　see　Lotus　Charm.　He　walked　like　a　man　in　a　daze.　But　Lotus　Charm　was　not　communicative.　To　every　question　he　put　to　her　she　only　smiled　and　shook　her　head.

“Why,　oh,　why　did　you　let　him？"　Pao　Ching　demanded.　He　was　hysterical.　His　forehead　was　burning,　and　his　heart　ached.　“Why,　tell　me,　why,"　he　implored.　He　put　out　his　hands　to　touch　her,　but　hesitated.　All　the　time　she　was　looking　at　him　with　a　half　smile　on　her　face.

He　did　not　notice　that　Mrs.　Fang　and　Phoenix　Girl　had　entered　the　room.　All　he　could　see　was　the　face　of　Lotus　Charm,　her　thin　lips　sealed,　the　eyes　dark　and　mysterious.　Then　he　heard　a　noise.　A　great　clot　of　liquor_stained　saliva　splashed　on　Lotus　Charm's　face.　Pao　Ching　sprang　up.　He　grabbed　his　wife　and　hurled　her　from　the　room.　Outside　he　slapped　her　face　and　then　came　back.　How　dare　she　spit　on　his　daughter,　even　if　she　had　sinned？

Phoenix　Girl　was　wiping　Lotus　Charm's　face　with　handkerchief.　“Please　talk　to　me,"　she　pleaded.　“Why　keep　your　troubles　to　yourself.　It　helps　to　talk."

Lotus　Charm　covered　her　face　with　her　hands　and　wept.　“What　do　you　want　to　do？"　Phoenix　Girl　asked　presently.　“Do　you　want　to　go　to　him？　Do　you　really　love　him？"

“What　else　can　I　do？"　Lotus　Charm　said　ruefully.　“I　can't　stay　here　with　mother　as　she　is."

“Will　he　marry　you,　do　you　think？　And　if　he　does,　can　he　support　you？　Is　he　reliable？"

“I　don't　know.　How　would　I　know？　All　I　know　is　that　when　he　is　near　I　am　mad　about　him.　He　can　do　with　me　as　he　wishes.　It　is　love.　It　hurts,　but　it　is　sweet."

“Does　he　love　you,　really？　I　don't　know　what　love　is,　as　you　think　about　it,　but　does　he　feel　about　you　as　you　think　you　feel　about　him？"

“I　don't　know,　I　don't　know."　Lotus　Charm　beat　the　bed　with　her　clenched　fist.　“I　know　nothing.　I'm　sorry　and　then　I'm　not　sorry.　If　I　don't　go　with　him,　where　shall　I　go？　I'll　be　worthless　and　a　shame　to　the　family.　If　I　go,　I'll　be　lost　too."

Phoenix　Girl　told　Pao　Ching　later　that　Lotus　Charm　wanted　to　go　with　her　lover.　Pao　Ching　accepted　it　with　resignation.　He　thought　of　his　business.　His　show　was　ruined.　How　could　he　fill　in　the　numbers　which　Lotus　Charm　used　to　sing？　And　with　Jeweled　Lute　married？　He　remembered　that　he　and　Little　Liu　could　do　comedy　dialogue　together.　Perhaps　that　was　the　solution.

He　went　down　to　the　theater.　That　night　he　and　Little　Liu　did　a　new　act,　but　it　was　a　miserable　failure.

After　the　show,　Pao　Ching　posted　an　armed　guard　at　the　front　door　of　the　theater.　He　told　the　man　that　on　no　account　was　Chang　Wen　to　be　allowed　in.　Then　he　bought　a　padlock　and　put　it　on　Lotus　Charm's　door.　He　was　not　afraid　of　Chang　Wen.　Even　if　Chang　tried　to　shoot　him,　he　would　still　win.





