19


The　Tangs　wasted　no　time　in　trying　to　take　advantage　of　Pao　Ching's　sickness.　They　figured　that　because　of　Useless　Fang's　death　Pao　Ching　and　Lotus　Charm　would　be　short　an　accompanist.　They　would　either　have　to　quit　the　stage　altogether　or　have　to　join　up　with　the　Tangs　to　obtain　the　services　of　Little　Liu.　It　looked　as　if　the　Tangs　had　all　the　cards.　If　the　Fangs　didn't　work,　so　much　the　better;　the　Tangs　would　have　all　the　business　and　no　competition.　If　Pao　Ching　and　Lotus　Charm　joined　up,　the　Tangs　could　make　whatever　terms　they　liked.　They　hustled　back　to　Chungking　in　high　spirits,　their　imaginary　profits　already　in　their　pockets.

But　conditions　had　changed　in　the　provisional　capital.　There　was　a　war　going　on.　China　was　fighting　for　her　life　and　the　cost　of　the　fighting　was　great.　Military　defeats　have　to　be　paid　for,　a　people　has　to　be　fed,　and　there　is　always　that　internal　war　against　greedy　unpatriotic　citizens,　who　hoard　food　and　start　a　black　market.　The　cost　of　living　had　risen　a　thousandfold,　and　the　provisional　government　was　at　its　wits'　end　to　stop　the　swiftly　climbing　spiral　of　inflation.　People,　it　seemed,　had　too　much　money　to　spend,　and　the　money　was　buying　less　every　day.　The　problem　was　to　stop　the　spending　on　frivolous　luxuries　and　confine　it　to　the　needs　of　the　day,　the　necessities　of　life.　Free　spending　had　to　be　halted.　Someone　in　high　office　suggested　putting　a　curb　on　the　entertainment　business.　A　new　regulation　was　drawn　up.　For　Chungking,　the　provisional　capital,　there　were　to　be　five　legitimate　theaters,　four　movie　houses,　and　one　drum_singing　theater.

And　the　drum_singing　theater　allowed　to　operate　belonged　to　the　patriotic　and　distinguished　drum　singer,　Pao　Ching,　now　mourning　the　loss　of　his　brother　in　South　Warm　Springs.

This　was　a　severe　blow　to　the　Tangs.　The　prize　of　a　theater　without　competition　had　seemed　almost　within　their　grasp.　Now　they　were　quite　sure　that　Pao　Ching　had　used　influence　in　government　circles　to　order　their　theater　closed.　That　Pao　Ching　had　rendered　notable　service　to　the　government,　did　not　occur　to　them.　Mr.　and　Mrs.　Tang　hurried　back　to　South　Warm　Springs　to　hurl　abuse　at　the　sick　head　of　their　old　friend　and　benefactor.

Pao　Ching　was　still　sick　in　bed　when　they　burst　in.　He　listened　with　a　sad　tolerant　smile　on　his　face.　Actually　he　was　in　no　mood　to　care　what　they　had　on　their　minds.　His　fever　was　still　troubling　him,　and　he　was　too　tired　even　to　argue.　With　half_open　eyes　he　lay　propped　up　on　the　pillows　watching　his　unwelcome　visitors.　Fourth　Master　was　grimacing　with　furious　gestures.　But　Pao　Ching　looked　at　them　and　sadly　shook　his　pale　face.　“My　friends,"　he　appealed　in　a　weak　voice,　“I　am　a　sick　man.　I　have　not　left　my　bed　since　my　brother's　death.　How　could　I　do　you　harm？　Please　consider　my　situation　for　once.　My　brother　is　dead,　my　daughter　has　left　her　husband,　and　my　heart　is　so　weary　that　I　do　not　want　ever　to　sing　again.　How　could　I　make　troubld　for　you？"

Fourth　Master　looked　at　his　wife.　Fat　Mrs.　Tang's　face　wore　a　mixed　expression　of　simpering　smile　and　wicked　frown.　She　stared　at　her　husband　for　an　instant,　and　then　nodded　her　head　ever　so　slightly.　This　was　the　sign　to　change　tactics.

Immediately　Fourth　Master　Tang　buttered　his　voice　with　unctuous　concern.　“But,　my　dear　friend,"　he　asked,　“if　you　don't　sing,　what　will　happen　to　the　others？　Little　Liu　is　counting　on　working　with　you　and　Lotus　Charm　again.　That　is　all　he　talks　about.　So　please　think　of　him　and　our　daughter.　You　cannot　let　them　starve."

“And　what　about　us？"　burst　in　Mrs.　Tang.　“We　have　to　live.　We　have　no　money.　The　cost　of　living　is　mounting.　You　can't　leave　us　in　the　lurch　like　this."

Pao　Ching　shrugged　his　shoulders.　“All　night,"　he　promised,　“I'll　get　in　touch　with　you　when　I'm　better."

They　went　out　like　whipped　dogs.　When　they　had　gone　Pao　Ching　began　to　weep.　“You　were　right,　my　big　brother,"　he　said　to　himself.　“Entertainers　are　cheap.　So　cheap."

And　then　as　in　a　dream　he　saw　the　miserable　face　of　Phoenix　Girl　as　she　struggled　with　the　household　chores.　Why　hadn't　he　the　strength　of　mind　to　chuck　the　entertainment　business,　to　get　out　and　go　into　something　respectable？　There　was　his　daughter　—　cheated　in　marriage　and　thrown　out　like　a　soiled　plaything　because　her　father　was　in　show　business.　It　was　cruel,　it　was　unjust,　but　it　was　a　fact.　That　was　the　reward　he　got　from　society.　He　sighed.　He　had　never　done　anything　wrong.　Always　he　had　tried　to　conduct　himself　along　good　moral　lines,　he　had　even　thought　of　founding　a　school　to　teach　others　the　art　of　drum　singing,　to　perpetuate　his　name.

And　now　he　was　broke.　All　his　spare　money　had　gone　on　Useless　Fang's　funeral.　His　daughter's　marriage　had　been　costly,　and　then　his　illness.　All　the　money　was　gone,even　his　few　savings.　And　the　cost　of　living　was　flying　high　like　a　kite.　There　was　nothing　to　do　but　to　work.

Thereupon　he　got　out　of　bed,　and　decided　that　he　was　better.　There　was　no　time　to　be　lost.　He　was　better.　He　could　stand　up,　he　could　walk　about,　and　he　could　think.　No　longer　had　he　time　to　be　sick.　A　week　later　he　was　in　Chungking,　and　there　he　found　everything　twice　as　high　as　it　had　been.　Inflation　had　tripled　salaries,　and　since　no　one　could　live　on　his　salary,　everyone　wanted　a　tip.　Hands　were　out　for　everything.　Pao　Ching　couldn't　get　by　any　longer　with　talking　and　smiling.　It　was　the　season　of　the　big　pay_out.

But　business　was　good.　It　seemed　as　if　the　people,　knowing　their　money　was　worth　nothing,　wanted　to　get　as　much　as　it　was　worth,　as　quickly　as　possible.　No　one　thought　of　saving.　Spend,　spend　all　this　useless　stuff.

Pao　Ching　had　changed.　He　was　happy　singing　and　managing　the　theater,　but　he　could　not　smile　any　more.　At　any　idle　moment　in　his　day　he　would　find　his　thoughts　going　back　to　brood　over　the　death　of　his　brother.　He　was　sure　that　he　had　brought　Useless　Fang　bad　luck.　He　had　insisted　on　earning　a　living　in　the　show　business,　although　Useless　Fang　had　always　objected.　And　his　poor　lonely　deserted　daughter.　Now,　in　her　misery　she　was　turning　to　her　mother,　who　was　more　often　drunk　than　not.

Pao　Ching　felt　that　it　was　his　duty　to　help　Phoenix　Girl.　He　did　everything　he　could　to　make　her　happy,　paying　her　more　attention　than　ever　before.　She　was　worse　than　a　widow,　an　unfortunate.　What　would　the　future　bring　her？　Thinking　of　that　drove　him　to　a　frenzy　of　exasperation.　He　would　sit　and　sweat　with　worry.　How　could　he　find　her　another　husband,　after　she　had　failed　so　miserably　with　the　first？　With　his　mind　worrying　on　these　problems　he　took　to　buying　her　little　presents　—　candy　and　finery　—　giving　her　one　of　everything　he　had　been　accustomed　to　buy　for　Lotus　Charm　through　the　years.

Of　the　Tangs　they　saw　nothing.　Jeweled　Lute　turned　up　for　work　and　left　immediately　after　her　act.　She　did　not　mention　her　parents.　Little　Liu　played　the　accompaniments　and　went　home　in　silence.　Pao　Ching　worried　about　this.　It　could　only　mean　that　the　Tangs　were　thinking　up　some　new　deviltry.　But　he　was　too　tired　to　exercise　his　brain　imagining　what　they　might　be　doing.Let　them　try　anything,　he　decided　wearily,　they　are　always　trying　something.　He　seemed　to　be　living　from　day　to　day.　Often　he　would　repeat　the　old　saying　to　comfort　himself:　“You　put　on　your　shoes　today,　but　you　are　not　sure　you　will　be　wearing　them　tomorrow."

One　afternoon　Little　Liu　asked　Pao　Ching　if　he　would　take　tea　with　him　at　a　tea　shop.　Pao　Ching　accepted.　What　was　wrong　with　Little　Liu？　Normally　he　was　sickly　pale,　now　he　was　flushed　and　animated.　He　had　been　drinking.　Well,　that　was　better　than　opium.

Pao　Ching　sat　waiting　for　Little　Liu　to　talk.　But　instead　Little　Liu　stared　at　the　huge　colored　posters　on　the　walls:　“Don't　Talk　Politics."　He　sipped　his　tea,　and　still　didn't　talk.　Pao　Ching　became　anxious.　And　Little　Liu's　face　was　getting　redder　all　the　time.

“So,　younger　brother,"　Pao　Ching　finally　demanded,　“what　is　on　your　mind？"

Little　Liu　gave　him　a　desperate　look.　His　thin　face　became　pale　again,　the　corners　of　his　sensitive　mouth　downturned　with　pain.

“I　cannot　go　on　any　more,"　he　announced　with　bitter　finality.　“I　can't　go　on."

Pao　Ching　looked　innocent.　“What　do　you　mean,　my　brother？　I　don't　understand."

Little　Liu's　eyes　were　hot,　and　his　voice　was　bitter.　“I　may　be　an　entertainer,　but　I　have　my　self_respect.　I　can't　go　on　living　with　Jeweled　Lute,　knowing　that　she　sleeps　with　any　man　who　comes　along.　It's　too　much,　I　tell　you.　I　thought　I　could　overlook　it,　but　I　was　wrong.　I　thought　we　would　get　along　wonderfully.　When　we　were　married　I　would　play　and　she　could　sing,　and　we　would　be　happy.　And　I　thought　that　marriage　would　stop　her　being　promiscuous,　but　you　know　what　her　parents　have　been　doing？　They　have　been　encouraging　her　to　keep　me　company,　and　also　to　take　her　calls　at　the　same　time.　And　I　can't　take　it.　When　I　mention　marriage　they　just　smile　and　ask　if　I　think　I　could　support　her.　Support　her　—　why,　I　give　them　most　of　the　money　I　make　for　the　privilege　of　being　her　boy　friend.　And　when　I　ask　Jeweled　Lute　to　be　faithful　to　me,　she　just　looks　at　me　and　says,　`Why　be　jealous？　One　man　is　like　another.'　What　can　I　do？"　Little　Liu　bowed　his　head,　and　added　almost　under　his　breath,　“And　I　thought　she　did　it　because　her　parents　made　her.　That's　not　true.　She　likes　it.　She's　a　born　whore."

“A　woman　needs　only　a　beginning,"　commented　Pao　Ching　for　want　of　anything　better　to　say.

Little　Liu　coughed.　Presently　he　said　in　a　hard　determined　tone,　“Well,　they　used　her　as　bait　for　me　last　time.　You　know,　they　would　not　let　me　play　for　you.　They　made　me　promise,　and　I　did.　I　failed　you,　although　you　were　so　good　to　me.　Now　they　have　another　idea.　They　are　proposing　to　leave　you　high　and　dry,　and　go　to　Kunming,　where　they　are　told　business　is　good.　The　city　is　full,　and　there　is　no　theater.　And　they　want　me　to　go　with　them.　But　I　will　not　go.　I　won't　go！"

“If　you　don't　go　Jeweled　Lute　won't　be　able　to　sing,"said　Pao　Ching　without　any　show　of　what　was　going　on　in　his　mind.　“They'll　make　you　go."

“Elder　brother,　that　is　why　I　am　here　to　ask　your　advice.　I　want　you　to　help　me.　Here's　the　truth.　I　am　not　officially　married　to　Jeweled　Lute,　and　I　can　cut　off　relations　with　her,　just　like　that."　He　snapped　his　long　thin　fingers.　“When　I　am　free　of　her,　the　Tangs　can　do　nothing.　I　shall　not　be　under　their　thumb　any　more.　So,　elder　brother,　this　is　my　idea."　Little　Liu　paused　and　his　face　bacame　red.

“Go　on,　what　is　it？"

“I　hope　you　will　not　be　angry　with　me."

“How　can　I　say　if　I　don't　know　what's　on　your　mind？"

“Elder　brother."　Little　Liu　stared　at　his　teacup.　“If　I　was　officially　married　to　someone　else,　I　wouldn't　have　to　live　with　the　Tangs　any　more,　and　they　would　have　no　hold　on　me."

“Correct,　sounds　like　a　good　idea."

“Thank　you.　Now　suppose　..."

“Suppose　what？"

“I　cannot　say　it."

“Please　proceed.　We　are　brothers　and　friends."

“Well,　I　...I　thought　that　I　might　marry　that　elder　daughter　of　yours."

Pao　Ching　was　stunned.　He　felt　as　if　he　had　been　pushed　into　an　ice　cold　brook.　“But　we　are　sworn　brothers,　Little　Liu,　I　don't　see　how."

“I　am　more　than　ten　years　younger　than　you,"　countered　Little　Liu.　“And　I　respect　you.　I　have　thought　this　all　out.　Your　eldest　daughter　is　pleasant　and　simple.　I　wouldn't　do　her　any　harm.　I　like　her.　In　fact,　I　always　wanted　to　marry　her,　but　I　never　had　the　courage　to　ask　you.　I　always　felt　you　didn't　want　her　to　marry　into　the　show　business,　particularly　not　to　a　mere　accompanist.　Now　I　want　to　marry　your　daughter.　She　is　unhappy.　I　will　make　her　happy.　I'll　stop　opium　smoking,　and　I　will　become　an　upright　person.　After　all,　Pao　Ching,　we　are　in　the　same　profession.　That's　better　—　I　mean　it's　better　she　should　marry　me　than　someone　outside　the　profession."

Pao　Ching　couldn't　answer　for　a　while.　Here　it　was　again.　The　vicious　circle.　An　entertainer　marrying　an　entertainer's　daughter　and　producing　more　unfortunates.　And　this　little　man　who　had　been　fornicating　with　Jeweled　Lute,　who　had　double_crossed　him　to　get　his　fun　in　bed,　wanted　to　marry　Phoenix　Girl.　Could　he　ask　his　daughter　to　do　that？　He　shook　his　head.　Something　Useless　Fang　had　said　came　into　his　mind,　“One　entertainer　in　a　generation,　and　three　generations　will　suffer."

He　spoke　out　loud　without　being　aware　of　it.　Little　Liu　stared　at　him　stupidly.　To　Pao　Ching　he　was　like　a　little　white　dog　waiting　for　a　morsel　from　its　master's　table.

“I'll　talk　it　over　with　the　family,"　Pao　Ching　said.

Little　Liu　smiled.　“Better　hurry.　The　Tangs　want　me　to　leave　with　them　this　week."

Pao　Ching　cursed　him.　The　little　turtle　was　forcing　his　hand.　How　low　could　a　man　be？　He　was　about　to　make　some　tactful　remark　when　Little　Liu　said　boldly,　“If　you　don't　agree　I　shall　have　to　go　to　Kunming　with　them."

Pao　Ching　wanted　to　shout　at　him　angrily.　No　friendship,　no　loyalty.　Their　relations　were　like　a　game　of　chess.　And　after　all　he　had　done　for　Little　Liu.　What　kind　of　world　was　this？　Wasn't　anyone　clean　and　honest？

But　he　kept　his　face　smooth　and　bland.　Why　show　Little　Liu　he　was　annoyed？　And　if　the　accompanist　did　go　off　with　the　Tangs,　then　he　would　be　stuck.

That　night　he　talked　the　matter　over　with　his　wife.　Did　she　object　to　her　daughter　marrying　an　entertainer？　Why,　no.　And　if　it　didn't　turn　out　right,　would　she　be　to　blame？　Why,　no.　She　had　no　objection,　but　she　used　the　conversation　as　an　excuse　to　have　a　few　swigs　of　wine.

Pao　Ching　discussed　the　subject　with　Phoenix　Girl.　She　listened　coldly,　without　any　show　of　emotion.　There　was　no　blush　on　her　cheek,　and　her　eyes　were　calm　and　placid.　It　seemed　to　Pao　Ching　that　she　was　interested　in　trying　marriage　again.

“But　he　did　not　give　me　a　divorce,"　she　said.

“He　didn't　have　to.　He　was　married　before.　If　he　dared　to　come　back　I　would　sue　him　for　polygamy,"　said　Pao　Ching　sternly.

“All　right,　father,　do　what　you　think　is　right.　I　am　ready."

Pao　Ching　felt　sick.　His　daughter　was　ready,　with　one　man's　baby　in　her　belly,　to　jump　into　another　man's　bed　because　her　father　had　suggested　it.　Hot　shame　veiled　his　mind　for　a　moment,　and　then　he　realized　how　much　he　loved　his　brother,　and　why.　It　was　because　his　brother　had　been　the　only　person　in　his　family　with　ideals.　The　rest　of　them　were　all　bound　by　money.　Phoenix　Girl　didn't　object　to　marrying　Little　Liu　because　it　would　help　her　father　and　mother　to　eat.　Pao　Ching　laughed.

Phoenix　Girl　asked,　“Why　are　you　laughing　at　me？"

“I　wasn't,"　he　said　half　in　truth.　“You　are　a　good　child.　You　know　how　to　take　care　of　your　father.　All　honor　to　you."

So　the　marriage　was　decided.

Lotus　Charm　was　horrified.　Since　Phoenix　Girl　had　first　come　home　she　had　tried　to　comfort　her　and　build　up　a　close　friendship.　Now　she　withdrew　into　herself.　If　her　sister　married　Little　Liu　without　loving　him,　why,　then,　her　relations　with　him　would　be　the　same　as　with　Jeweled　Lute.　She　was　acting　as　a　prostitute.　And　how　could　her　father　arrange　such　a　marriage？　He　had　failed　in　her　estimation.　He　wasn't　selling　his　daughter,　but　he　was　giving　her　away　in　exchange　for　an　accompanist.　He　was　using　Phoenix　Girl　for　his　own　convenience.　It　was　the　same　as　selling　her.

“Elder　sister,"　she　asked　Phoenix　Girl,　“how　can　you　be　so　placid　and　allow　father　to　arrange　your　life　for　you？"

“What　would　happen　to　me　if　I　didn't？"

Lotus　Charm　shook　her　head　in　rebellion.　Her　eyes　flashed　with　anger.　“I'd　rather　steal　a　man　than　be　given　to　one.　You　are　being　pulled　in　all　directions　like　a　puppet."

“Don't　you　dare　say　that,"　flashed　Phoenix　Girl.　“I　wouldn't　do　such　a　shameful　thing　as　stealing　a　man.　You　may　think　I　am　weak　and　helpless,　but　I　am　not.　I　have　a　mind　of　my　own.　That's　why　I　am　agreeing　to　this　marriage.　But　I　have　to　have　father's　blessing.　Without　it　I　can　do　nothing.　I　am　starting　again,　and　I　want　to.　For　me,　marrying　Little　Liu　is　like　putting　a　clean　tablecloth　over　a　soiled　table."

Lotus　Charm　was　silent　at　that.　She　was　wondering　how　people　could　have　such　different　viewpoints　as　her　sister　and　Mr.　Meng.　After　a　while　she　said　to　her　sister:　“Sister,　if　Little　Liu　also　beats　you,　let　me　know.　I　will　fight　him　for　you！"

The　Tangs　were　furious.　Jeweled　Lute　was　livid　with　rage.　Deep　in　her　heart　she　liked　Little　Liu.　Playing　around　with　other　men　for　money　was　amusing,　but　it　was　nice　to　have　a　steady　bedfellow　to　come　home　to.　He　was　at　least　clean　and　kind.　The　other　men　were　all　kinds,　fat　and　cruel,　dirty　and　ugly,　but　if　they　had　money　she　was　theirs　for　an　hour.　Always　she　had　felt　that　sooner　or　later　she　and　Little　Liu　could　be　really　happy.　Her　attitude　toward　him　was　motherly.　She　liked　to　pet　and　fondle　him,　and　do　little　things　for　his　comfort,　and　it　was　nice　to　have　him　always　at　hand　for　her　pleasure.　They　quarreled,　of　course,　but　always　it　would　be　Jeweled　Lute　who　would　end　it　by　getting　him　to　bed　and　saying,　“Now,　baby,　don't　be　angry.　Mama　will　play　with　you."

Now　the　dream　was　shattered.　Jeweled　Lute　decided　she　was　going　to　fight.　She　would　go　and　have　it　out　with　Phoenix　Girl,　and　she　would　stop　at　nothing.

The　Fangs　were　at　lunch　when　Jeweled　Lute　stormed　in.　Her　hair　was　streaming　down　her　back.　Her　face　was　drawn　and　livid.　She　forgot　her　intention　of　having　it　out　with　Phoenix　Girl　the　moment　she　entered　and　saw　Pao　Ching.　She　shook　her　fist　at　him　and　shrieked,　“Come　outside,　Pao　Ching.　I　have　something　to　settle　with　you　—　you."

Pao　Ching　went　on　eating.　Phoenix　Girl　guessed　what　Jeweled　Lute　wanted,　but　she　did　not　look　in　her　direction.　Pao　Ching　was　thinking　as　he　munched　his　food,　“It　would　be　silly　to　get　mixed　up　with　Jeweled　Lute　in　a　quarrel."　She　was　a　women,　and　a　tough　one　at　that.　Woman　should　deal　with　women.　He　looked　at　his　wife.　Mrs.　Fang　was　obviously　angry.　Slowly　she　got　up　from　the　table　and　waddled　across　to　Jeweled　Lute,　her　fat　elbows　moving　with　tremendous　power,　as　if　she　was　going　to　crush　the　girl.　Her　eyes　were　large　and　bright,　and　there　was　a　hard　smile　on　her　face.

“And　what　do　you　want,　Jeweled　Lute？"　she　inquired,　halting　a　few　yards　from　the　disheveled　angry　girl.　Jeweled　Lute　could　read　the　signs.　She　took　a　step　backward,　one　hand　on　her　throat.　Before　she　could　say　anything　Mrs.　Fang　had　delivered　her　proposition.　No　furious　blast　of　foul　language　which　Jeweled　Lute　had　expected,　and　was　ready　to　counter,　no　storm　of　accusations,　no　threats.　“You　know,　Jeweled　Lute,"　Mrs.　Fang　said　in　a　soft　firm　voice,　“if　you　want　to　go　on　working　for　us,　you　had　better　watch　your　step.　Why　don't　you　quit　the　hysterics　and　be　serious？　You　don't　have　to　work　with　us　if　you　don't　want　to.　We　can　get　along　without　you,　but　if　you　want　a　job　here,　there　it　is.　Now　what　do　you　say？"

Jeweled　Lute　had　come　to　have　a　fight　with　the　Fangs.　Instead　Mrs.　Fang　was　talking　business　to　her.　Nothing　would　be　changed　except　that　she　wouldn't　go　home　with　Little　Liu.　Mrs.　Fang　was　right,　but　Jeweled　Lute　had　to　save　face.　So　she　began.　She　called　Pao　Ching,　Phoenix　Girl,　and　Little　Liu　foul　names.　Mrs.　Fang　replied　with　even　worse　—　words　so　bad　that　Jeweled　Lute　felt　she　had　to　start　all　over　again.　Then　she　left,　having　made　it　clear　to　Mrs.　Fang　that　she　was　coming　to　work　as　usual　and　that　what　Little　Liu　wanted　to　do　with　his　spare　time　didn't　concern　her.

Lotus　Charm　was　shocked.　She　had　never　heard　such　a　collection　of　swear　words　as　those　used　by　her　mother　and　Jeweled　Lute,　and　they　were　all　connected　with　marriage　and　with　men　and　women's　anatomy.　What　did　they　all　mean？　She　had　always　looked　on　love　as　pure　and　romantic.　But　her　mother　and　Jeweled　Lute　had　put　it　on　the　lowest　level,　and　her　father　hadn't　said　a　word.　As　if　he　was　accustomed　to　this,　as　if　he　agreed.

She　looked　at　her　father　and　then　at　her　sister.　Poor　things.　They　had　decided　on　this　marriage　to　benefit　the　Fang　business　and　provide　Phoenix　Girl　with　a　husband,　and　they　would　go　through　with　it　at　all　cost.　Custom　allowed　it,　and　convention　blessed　it.　Her　sister　was　not　an　entertainer,　and　she　was　not　a　loose　woman,　so　she　would　have　some　kind　of　social　status　as　a　married　woman.　But　Lotus　Charm　could　not　shake　off　the　impression　that　Phoenix　Girl　was　like　a　poor　little　dog,　chained　by　the　neck.　She　could　be　kicked　and　spat　upon,　but　she　would　be　considered　a　good　woman　because　she　was　married　with　her　father's　blessing.　Her　young　brows　creased.　What　was　her　own　fate　going　to　be？　She　shuddered　to　think,　and　ran　from　the　room　to　cry　in　her　bedroom.

Mrs.　Fang　poured　herself　a　long　drink.　She　was　flushed　with　victory.　Everything　was　satisfactory.　She　had　wanted　to　give　that　diseased　little　trollop,　Jeweled　Lute,　a　bit　of　her　mind　for　a　long　time.　Now　she　had　relieved　herself　of　every　word　she　had　wanted　to　say,　every　foul　epithet　she　had　ever　heard,　and　she　felt　relaxed.　She　sat　in　her　chair　mumbling　over　a　few　of　the　choicest　epithets.　My,　but　that　little　whore　had　got　an　earful,　and　she　would　give　old　lady　Tang　the　same　if　she　ever　came　round.





