Chapter　Seventeen


EASTERN　SUN'S　SICK　LEAVE　was　extended.When　he　helped　the　Japanese　to　create　terrorism，he　had　never　thought　what　terrorism　itself　was　like.He　had　never　thought　about　how　the　young　boys　and　girls　trembled　when　they　were　arrested，or　how　broken　were　their　parents'hearts.He　knew　only　that　he　had　position　and　wealth，and　that　knowledge　made　him　happy.

But　now　he　knew　also　that　Rey　Tang　had　brought　him　a　cartridge.He　dared　not　touch　the　cartridge.He　thought　that　if　he　should　touch　it，it　would　explode.　It　was　so　shiny　and　so　cold，always　looking　at　him，following　him　like　an　eyeball　which　could　move.

He　did　not　think　of　retribution　for　he　had　never　admitted　to　himself　that　he　had　any　guilt，that　he　had　committed　any　crime.He　was　now　looking　directly　at　death.He　did　not　admit　his　crimes　nor　could　he　think　of　redemption.Redemption　such　as　religious　people　believe　in　could　give　hope，but　he　had　no　hope.

He　was　afraid，afraid.Gnawing　his　fingernails　he　screamed　and　rushed　to　his　bed.He　covered　his　head　with　the　bedclothes.He　held　his　breath　for　a　long　time　and　hid，sweating.He　dared　not　raise　the　bedclothes.He　felt　that　death　was　waiting　for　him　outside　his　quilts.

Only　when　Fat　Chrysanthemum　came　home　did　he　dare　push　aside　the　bedding　and　sit　up.He　called　her　over　and　frenziedly　embraced　her.He　bit　her　fat　arm　savagely.She　was　his　fat　woman，before　he　died　he　must　bite　her，grind　her　under　his　feet，so　would　he　get　his　money's　worth.

After　he　had　bitten　her　he　looked　around　the　room，at　the　things　in　the　room，and　counted　how　much　money　he　had.He　shouted，“I　mustn't　die，　I　mustn't　die.”

Without　waiting　to　put　on　his　shoes　he　went　for　pencil　and　paper　to　list　all　the　furniture，clothes，teapots，and　rice　bowls　he　had.He　even　listed　the　brooms　and　the　feather　dusters.The　higher　the　numbers　he　put　down　the　more　elated　he　became　and　the　more　frightened.If　he　should　die　soon　to　whom　would　he　leave　all　these　things？No，he　would　not　leave　them　to　Fat　Chrysanthemum.She　had　married　him　only　because　of　his　money　and　position;he　would　not　leave　her　his　goods.

He　again　embraced　her　and　putting　his　mouth　against　her　face　and　said，“You　must　die　with　me，　with　me.”　Yes，he　must　have　a　companion　to　lie　with　him　in　the　coffin，or　after　death　he　would　be　afraid　day　and　night.

Fat　Chrysanthemum　drew　away　from　him.He　ground　his　teeth.Ha！She　was　after　all　one　of　the　Chi　family！She　would　probably　return　to　the　Chi　family　and　marry　Rey　Tang.

He　pled　with　Chrysanthemum　not　to　leave　him　again.At　the　same　time　he　discussed　with　her　how　he　could　escape　from　Peiping.

Yes，he　must　escape　from　Peiping.Once　he　was　out　of　Pei-ping　Rey　Tang　would　not　be　able　to　find　him.There　was　under　heaven　only　one　Rey　Tang.　Once　he　got　somewhere　else　he　could　again　wear　the　big　purple　and　the　big　red.　Except　for　Rey　Tang　he　had　no　enemies.

But　if　he　should　escape　how　would　he　manage　to　take　all　his　things　with　him？Those　tables　and　stools　were　far　from　being　as　important　as　gold　and　silver，but，after　all，they　were　his;　and　whether　they　were　of　wood　or　of　porcelain　they　all　had　his　blood　in　them.　But　if　he　took　too　much　he　would　certainly　be　stopped　by　the　Japanese.

In　the　night　if　he　heard　a　report　—　perhaps　a　rickshaw　tire　bursting—he　would　with　one　roll　be　under　the　bed　and　cover　his　face　with　both　hands.

This　anxiety　and　fear　made　him　lose　his　appetite　but　he　forced　much　food　down　himself.　He　must　eat，so　he　would　have　the　strength　to　resist.After　he　had　eaten　he　could　not　digest　the　food　and　his　breath　stank　even　more.Since　all　the　doors　and　windows　were　tightly　closed，after　a　day　or　two　the　air　in　the　room　was　like　that　in　a　fox's　hole.

His　sick　leave　aroused　the　suspicions　of　the　Japanese.The　Japanese　doctor　came　to　examine　him.The　doctor　knocked　and　opened　the　door.The　stench　of　the　fox　nearly　suffocated　the　doctor.Quickly　he　opened　all　the　windows.

Ordinarily　if　a　Japanese　doctor　should　have　come　to　visit　him　how　many　times　Eastern　Sun　would　have　bowed.This　day，however，he　was　not　pleased.On　the　contrary　he　was　afraid.Were　not　those　who　worked　for　the　Japanese　often　poisoned　by　them？

The　doctor　gave　him　medicine　for　his　indigestion　but　he　would　not　take　it.The　doctor　administered　the　medicine　as　he　would　to　a　fractious　child.

Eastern　Sun　lay　on　the　bed　and　was　sure　that　he　would　die.He　began　to　weep.

The　medicine　moved　down　and　shortly　his　bowels　began　to　rumble.He　was　sure　he　had　been　given　arsenic.He　struggled　out　of　bed　and　again　shut　all　the　windows　and　the　door，and　then　relieved　himself　in　the　room.　His　abdomen　being　a　little　more　comfortable　he　smiled.Oh　no，the　Japanese　doctor　had　not　given　him　poison.He　was　still　the　confidant　of　the　Japanese.Good，he　must　find　a　sure　way　to　escape　from　Peiping.

Ah，why　not？Why　not　go　to　Japan？That　was　his　fatherland.

Fat　Chrysanthemum　was　in　the　midst　of　planning　for　herself.She　did　not　feel　it　unfair　to　Eastern　Sun　that　she　was　unwilling　to　wait　on　him.She　had　already　patiently　supplied　her　fat　flesh　to　him　for　more　than　three　years;she　need　not　go　out　of　the　way　to　try　to　please　him.

If　she　wanted　to　leave—taking　Eastern　Sun's　money　with　her　—　she　must　leave　at　once.She　could　not　wait　until　he　had　recovered.His　illness　was　her　opportunity.

She　had　already　changed　into　gold　and　silver　the　money　she　had　taken　from　Eastern　Sun，and　hid　it　in　her　maternal　home.But　who　could　say　that　the　Japanese　would　not　search　her　maternal　homeif　Eastern　Sun　should　die？She　should　run　away　and　run　quickly.If　she　ran　away　now　she　could　not　only　save　the　things　she　had　hidden　at　her　maternal　home，but　she　could　also　take　away　a　part　of　Eastern　Sun's　valuables.

If，for　instance，she　could　escape　to　Shanghai　or　Nanking，with　the　gold　in　her　hands　and　the　techniques　she　had　learned　all　these　years　from　Big　Red　Pepper　and　from　Eastern　Sun，　she　could　certainly　build　up　a　new　stove　to　cook　up　something　new.

She　could　not　calculate　any　longer.She　must　leave　quickly，and　seize　the　opportunity　while　Eastern　Sun　lay　half　dead　and　half　alive，to　take　all　the　valuables　to　her　maternal　home，and　then　—　with　Eastern　Sun's　seal　—　cash　his　bank　account.

Taking　the　most　valuable　things　and　the　cash，and　leaving　the　less　valuable　at　her　maternal　home，she　went　to　Tientsin.

When　Eastern　Sun　dicovered　that　Chrysanthemum　had　gone　he　did　not　miss　her　too　much.In　these　troublous　times　he　knew　that　he　could　exchange　a　sack　of　flour　for　a　young　girl.He　liked　fat　women，but　if　women's　flesh　was　counted　according　to　weight　he　could　—　with　two　bags　of　flour　—　get　him　a　fat　one.

But　when　he　discovered　that　Chrysanthemum　had　taken　his　treasure，his　eyeballs　rolled　up　and　he　was　unconscious　for　half　an　hour.To　be　sure　he　still　had　all　the　possessions　in　the　house，and　there　was　money　in　the　banks　about　which　Chrysanthemum　had　not　known，but　these　could　not　console　him.

Eastern　Sun　became　very　ill.Anxiety，cold，and　fear　attacked　him　from　all　sides.

His　green　face　—　because　he　was　suddenly　cold　and　suddenly　hot　—　was　sometimes　greyish　white　and　sometimes　purple.When　he　was　cold　his　yellow　teeth　chattered　incessantly.He　tried　to　plan　but　the　cold　kept　him　from　concentrating.All　he　could　think　of　was　death.

Then　suddenly　he　would　be　hot　all　over　and　his　thoughts　would　become　very　active，like　a　swarm　of　locusts　flying　wildly　and　without　order.When　a　thought　came　he　would　shout　loudly，“I　will　not　die.Give　me　money.Go　to　Japan　—　”

The　Japanese　doctor　came　again.Afer　taking　some　medicine　Eastern　Sun　slept　fitfully.His　sleep　was　not　sound　for　his　mind　would　not　be　still.He　worried　about　money　and　about　Chrysanthemum.

Because　of　Eastern　Sun's　long　illness　another　headmaster　was　appointed　to　the　School　of　Railway　Administration.

If　this　had　happened　in　other　times　Rey　Shuan　would　certainly　have　considered　whether　he　should　follow　the　traditional　custom　to　resign，but　now　he　decided　not　to　waste　thought　and　went　to　his　classes　as　usual.If　the　new　headmaster　wanted　to　keep　him　he　would　follow　Rey　Tang's　instructions　and　teach　the　students.If　the　new　headmaster　did　not　want　him　he　would　think　about　how　to　meet　the　problem　when　the　occasion　arose.

The　new　headmaster　was　a　middle-aged　man　without　much　vision，whose　intentions，however，were　not　bad.The　position　of　headmaster　was　one　that　he　had　sought，but　he　did　not　plan　to　squeeze　or　kill　the　students，nor　did　he　wish　to　change　his　fellow　workers.Rey　Shuan　kept　his　position.

To　Rey　Shuan　it　was　not　only　a　position，but　an　opportunity　to　do　his　duty　to　the　students　and　to　his　country.　He　explained　every　word　to　his　students　—　broke　open　the　meaning　and　rubbed　away　the　accumulation　of　ages，so　they　could　understand　every　usage　of　every　word.He　used　many　references　outside　the　textbook.He　picked　purposely　examples　of　literature　that　would　stimulate　their　imaginations　and　their　love　for　their　country，ones　that　would　help　wash　the　sense　of　national　humiliation　from　their　minds.He　picked　the　references　casually　as　if　only　to　explain　the　passages　being　studied.He　thought　that　in　this　way，even　if　there　were　secret　agents　among　the　students，they　would　not　easily　find　fault　with　him.

The　most　difficult　task　was　to　find　subjects　for　compositions.To　follow　his　educational　theories　he　was　unwilling　to　give　them　empty　and　trite　subjects　that　forced　the　students　to　have　no　way　but　to　begin　with，“Man　in　the　world，”　and　then　chew　the　ends　of　their　brushes　trying　to　think　of　what　to　say　next.But　he　could　not　give　them　the　big　subjects　that　had　to　do　with　current　events　and　the　great　affairs　of　the　time.If　he　had　dared　to　write　anything　closely　related　to　the　lives　of　the　students　on　the　blackboard　he　would　at　once　have　been　arrested.In　order　to　avoid　empty　themes　and　to　avoid　being　arrested　he　always　gave　them　topics　that　had　to　do　with　understanding　the　lessons　taught.In　this　way　he　gave　them　themes　about　which　they　had　words，and　also　he　could　get　the　reactions　of　the　students　to　what　he　taught　them.

While　correcting　these　compositions　he　felt　excited.Many　students　showed　not　only　that　they　understood　what　he　taught　them　but　spoke　discreetly　of　their　own　secret　heart　pains.In　this　way　the　tedium　of　correcting　compositions　changed　to　pleasure.He　was　talking　in　a　secret　language　with　a　group　of　young　people.

He　paid　special　attention　to　the　compositions　of　the　pupils　he　suspected.He　wanted　to　see　if　they　would　consciously　or　unconsciously　show　the　kind　of　thought　and　theory　that　the　Japanese　wanted　to　have　planted　in　the　youth　of　China.

What　made　him　most　happy　was　that　he　discovered　one　or　two　pupils　from　traitors'　families　who　wrote　exactly　opposite　to　what　their　fathers　thought.From　this　discovery　he　understood　the　mistake　he　had　made.He　had　been　pessimistic.He　had　thought　that　Peiping　once　occupied　by　the　Japanese　immediately　became　a　pool　of　stagnant　water.He　had　been　wrong.

He　decided　to　let　Little　Precious　go　to　school.He　had　no　time　to　teach　the　boy　himself.He　saw　clearly　that　the　teachers　in　the　schools　were　not　weak　and　worthless　as　he　had　imagined.

At　the　time　when　Eastern　Sun　was　suffering　from　sudden　cold　and　sudden　heat，the　winter　—　after　having　frozen　to　death　many　people　who　had　no　food　and　clothes　—　quietly　retreated　from　Peiping.The　new　spring　wind　seemed　still　not　to　know　how　to　behave　itself.Sometimes　it　was　cold　and　blew　away　the　snow　on　the　tops　of　the　walls.Sometimes　it　was　warm　and　brought　moisture　and　spring　clouds.The　accumulated　snow　on　the　old　city　walls　of　Peiping　began　to　melt.Moisture　began　to　show　between　the　bricks.At　the　foot　of　the　walls　life　seemed　especially　ready　to　face　danger.There　were　already　small，light　green，and　tender　sprouts　of　grass.Sometimes　the　golden　tops　of　the　pagodas　and　the　yellow　tiles　of　the　Imperial　Palace　gave　out　rays　of　light;sometimes　the　ice　would　suddenly　form　and　make　the　people　think　again　of　the　frightfulness　of　winter.

At　this　time　people　tore　off　the　thick　and　tattered　winter　clothes，but　when　the　gusts　of　cold　wind　came　they　would　catch　cold　and　die　quickly.The　borderland　between　winter　and　spring　killed　many　people.

At　last　the　spring　was　established　and　melted　all　the　snow　and　ice.The　brave　honey　bees　began　to　appear　in　the　air.News　that　was　warmer　than　the　spring　breeze　suddenly　came　and　made　all　the　people　of　Peiping　forget　the　hunger　and　cold　of　the　long　winter：the　American　air　force　had　bombed　the　Japanese　homeland.　Rey　Shuan　learned　the　news　from　the　pamphlets　sent　out　by　Old　Three.

Having　read　the　pamphlets　he　did　not　know　how　he　reached　the　school.

When　he　entered　the　classroom　Rey　Shuan　saw　many，many　eyes　shining　with　a　smilinh　light.Those　eyes　told　him　that　those　young　people　had　all　heard　the　news　of　the　bombing　of　Japan.The　happy　light　in　their　eyes　seemed　to　have　heat　and　made　the　classroom　unusually　warm.He　did　not　say　anything　but　looked　at　them　with　the　same　light　in　his　eyes.The　faces　of　all　wore　smiles　and　then　tears　appeared　in　many　eyes.

Rey　Shuan　began　to　lecture.　He　could　not　help　wanting　to　say　between　the　sentences，“Japan　has　been　bombed，”but　he　controlled　himself.The　words，however，whirled　like　music　in　his　heart.

He　also　wanted　to　say　to　the　students，“My　younger　brother，my　younger　brother　brought　this　news　to　us，”but　he　dared　not　say　it.

He　began　to　understand　propaganda.Before　this，because　of　his　pessimism，he　had　always　thought　that　propaganda　was　nothing　but　the　use　of　empty，useless　words　without　much　appeal　or　value.Now　—　look　—　this　one　piece　of　news　could　make　him　and　his　students　and　all　in　Peiping　excited　and　happy.

Why　not　make　more　propaganda？He　decided　to　help　Old　Three　make　propaganda.He　knew　how　to　write.He　knew　that　Old　Three　had　ways　to　get　what　he　wrote　printed，and　Uncle　Chien　had　ways　to　get　it　sent　around.

He　met　the　monk，Clear　Moon，on　the　street　and　told　him　his　wish　to　write　for　the　underground.The　monk　told　him　several　places　to　which　he　could　send　what　he　had　written，and　suggested　that　he　change　often，to　avoid　being　caught　by　the　spies.

As　he　left　the　monk　Rey　Shuan　really　saw　the　light　of　Pei-ping's　spring.He　was　elated.H　had　now　put　himself　in　a　definite　role.He　need　no　longer　feel　ashamed　of　himself　or　hesitate.

The　hearts　of　the　stored　turnips　had　become　pulp，but　on　their　heads　fresh　green　leaves　had　appeared.There　was　not　much　moisture　left　in　the　stored　cabbages　but　they　had　put　forth　tender　yellow　shoots.Even　the　humble　garlic　had　put　out　shoots　of　jade　green.Everything　was　decaying　and　everything　was　coming　to　life　again.





