Chapter　Twenty-five


WHILE　OLD　MAN　CHI　was　struggling　to　go　out　of　the　courtyard，　the　Japanese　of　house　Number　Three　had　already　bolted　the　gate　of　their　compound.　They　had　also　piled　many　things　against　the　gate　as　if　to　guard　against　street-to-street　fighting.

They　had　already　received　word　of　Japan's　surrender.

They　were　very　frightened.　When　their　war　lords　had　drummed　up　the　war　they　had　not　had　the　courage　to　stop　it.　When　the　battles　went　well　they　forgot　the　guilt　of　war　and　felt　only　its　satisfaction　and　glory.　Even　if　they　themselves　had　not　wanted　to　kill　people，　how　many　Chinese　had　not　their　soldiers　killed？

After　bolting　and　barricading　the　gate　they　all　went　into　one　room　and　wept　soundlessly.　War　was　now　a　nightmare.　Glory　and　privilege　had　suddenly　disappeared.　They　must　give　up　beautiful　Peiping，　their　handsome　house，　and　their　own　livelihood，　and　be　sent　back　like　prisoners　to　their　own　land.　And　there　was　the　possibility，　if　the　Chinese　neighbors　should　now　come　for　revenge，　that　they　might　lose　their　lives.

While　they　wept　silently　they　listened　for　sounds　from　outside.　If　the　news　of　the　Japanese　surrender　got　to　the　Chinese　ears　would　not　the　Chinese，　with　swords，　spears，　and　sticks，　knock　down　their　gates　and　split　their　heads？　They　did　not　think　of　the　crime　of　having　started　the　war　but　thought　only　of　the　shame　and　fear　of　defeat.　At　most　they　felt　only　that　war　was　not　a　dependable　thing.

The　old　Japanese　woman　in　house　Number　One　opened　the　two　halves　of　her　gate.　When　the　gate　was　opened　she　smiled　to　herself　as　if　to　say，　“Let　those　who　wish　revenge　come.　We　oppressed　you　for　eight　years;　now　you　should　take　revenge.　This　would　be　justice.”

Standing　inside　the　threshold　she　looked　at　the　big　locust　trees　outside　the　gate.　She　was　not　elated　by　the　news　of　the　defeat　of　the　Japanese　army，　but　she　did　not　feel　any　shame.　She　had　been　antiwar　from　the　beginning.　She　had　long　known　that　those　who　blindly　believed　in　force　would　bring　disaster　on　themselves.　She　stood　quietly　in　the　gate　and　in　her　heart　was　sadness.　The　war　was　over，　but　what　of　those　thousands　and　hundreds　of　thousands　dead？

She　walked　out　of　the　gate.　She　should　go　to　the　neighbors　and　tell　them　that　Japan　had　surrendered.　This　was　nothing　to　be　ashamed　of.　The　surrender　of　Japan　was　the　inevitable　result　of　blindly　worshipping　force.　She　could　not　because　she　was　a　Japanese　refuse　to　admit　this　truth.　At　the　same　time　she　should　become　good　friends　with　the　Chinese　and　make　for　her　and　them　a　friendship　built　on　foundations　above　revenge　and　hatred.

As　soon　as　she　came　out　of　the　gate　she　walked　inevitably　toward　the　gate　of　the　Chi　family.　She　had　always　considered　that　Old　Man　Chi　represented　some　kind　of　dignity，　but　she　felt　that　she　understood　Rey　Shuan.　Rey　Shuan　used　English　to　talk　with　her;　his　attitudes　and　knowledge　were　such　as　to　make　her　like　and　respect　him.　She　had　traveled　all　over　the　world，　and　Rey　Shuan　had　never　been　outside　the　city　of　Peiping，　yet　what　she　knew　he　knew　also.　No，　he　not　only　knew　but　was　understanding　about　world　affairs，　and　had　definite　hope　for　the　future　of　mankind.

Just　as　she　reached　the　threshold　of　the　Chi　family　gate，　Old　Man　Chi　carrying　Niu　Niu　came　around　the　spirit　screen.　Rey　Shuan　was　supporting　his　grandfather.　The　Japanese　woman　stood　still.　In　a　glance　she　saw　that　Niu　Niu　was　dead.　She　had　come　to　please　the　Chi　family，　and　to　talk　with　Rey　Shuan　about　the　future　relations　between　China　and　Japan;　but　she　saw　a　half-dead　old　man　carrying　a　dead　child　—　as　if　half-dead　China　embraced　thousands　and　tens　of　thousands　of　dead　sons.　What　was　the　difference　between　victory　and　defeat？　What　was　the　good　of　victory？　The　day　of　victory　should　be　cursed　and　should　be　wept.

The　shame　of　surrender　had　not　made　her　downhearted　but　the　death　of　Little　Niu　Niu　made　her　lose　her　self-confidence　and　courage.　She　started　to　go　back　home.

Old　Man　Chi's　eyes　moved　from　Niu　Niu　to　the　gate.　It　seemed　as　if　he　could　not　recognize　the　gate　through　which　he　had　come　in　and　gone　out　a　thousand　times，　and　felt　only　that　it　was　a　place　through　which　to　go　out　and　find　the　Japanese.　He　saw　the　old　Japanese　woman.

The　old　woman，　like　Old　Man　Chi，　loved　peace　and　had　lost　the　young　people　of　her　family;　she　should　have　been　able　to　go　forward　to　the　old　man　without　any　sense　of　shame，　but　a　war　of　aggression　makes　the　militarists　arrogant　and　the　people　with　conscience　feel　ashamed.　She　was　after　all　a　citizen　of　Japan.　She　felt　that　she　should　carry　some　of　the　responsibility　for　the　death　of　Little　Niu　Niu.　She　backed　a　few　steps.　Before　Old　Man　Chi　she　felt　that　she　was　guilty.

Old　Man　Chi　without　stopping　to　think　shouted，　“Stand　still，　look，　look！”　He　lifted　Niu　Niu's　thin　corpse　for　the　old　Japanese　woman　to　see.

The　old　woman　stood　silent.　She　wanted　to　turn　and　run　but　it　was　as　though　the　old　man　held　her　fast.

Rey　Shuan，　still　supporting　his　grandfather，　called　quietly，　“Grandfather，　Grandfather.”　He　knew　that　the　death　of　Little　Niu　Niu　had　nothing　to　do　with　the　old　woman　of　house　Number　One，　and　he　knew　that　his　grandfather　had　always　respected　the　old　woman;　but　he　dared　not　argue　with　his　grandfather　for　the　old　man　was　already　half-dead　and　half-alive，　half-conscious　and　half　in　a　stupor.

The　old　man，　still　staggering，　went　forward.　The　neighbors　silently　followed　him.

The　old　woman　seeing　the　old　man　was　coming　closer　seemed　to　brace　herself.　She　had　some　fear　of　the　old　man，　but　she　knew　that　he　was　a　righteous　man　and　that　if　it　were　not　for　the　death　of　Niu　Niu　he　would　not　have　made　this　scene.　She　must　tell　them　that　Japan　had　surrendered　so　they　could　have　a　little　comfort.

In　English　she　said　to　Rey　Shuan，　“Tell　your　grandfather　that　Japan　has　surrendered.”

Rey　Shuan　did　not　seem　to　understand　and　asked　himself　in　Chinese，　“Japan　surrendered？”　and　looked　again　at　the　old　woman.

The　old　woman　nodded　slightly.

Rey　Shuan　suddenly　began　to　tremble.　Trembling　and　in　a　daze　he　placed　his　hand　on　Little　Niu　Niu's　body.

“What　did　she　say？”　Old　Man　Chi　asked　in　a　loud　voice.

Holding　one　of　Niu　Niu's　little　cold　hands　Rey　Shuan　looked　at　her　little　face　and　said　to　himself，　“Victory，　Niu　Niu，　but　you—　”

“What　did　she　say？”　the　old　man　shouted　again.

Rey　Shuan　quickly　let　go　Niu　Niu's　hand　and　looked　at　his　grandfather　and　at　the　neighbors.　He　smiled　with　tears　in　his　eyes.　He　wanted　to　shout，　“We've　won　the　war，”　but　in　a　low　voice　and　as　if　unwillingly　he　said　to　his　grandfather，　“Japan　has　surrendered.”　When　he　had　told　them　the　tears　streamed　down　his　face.　The　sufferings　of　the　last　eight　years　in　his　mind　and　body　seemed　to　weigh　a　thousand　and　ten　thousand　catties.

Although　Rey　Shuan's　voice　had　been　very　low，　the　words，　“Japan　has　surrendered，”　were　like　the　wind　that　blows，　and　reached　the　ears　of　all　the　neighbors.

All　immediately　forgot　the　death　of　Little　Niu　Niu，　forgot　to　pity　Old　Man　Chi　and　Rey　Shuan，　forgot　to　care　for　Yun　Mei　and　Mrs.　Tien　Yiu.　Everyone　wanted　to　do　something　and　say　something.　They　seemed　to　want　to　run　out　to　see　what　victory　looked　like　and　to　open　their　mouths　and　shout，　“Ten　thousand　years　to　the　Chinese　Republic.”　Even　Old　Man　Chi　seemed　to　forget　what　he　had　been　about　to　do，　and　could　only　look　at　this　one　and　look　at　that　one.　Sorrow　and　joy　and　confusion　were　all　mixed　together.

The　old　Japanese　woman　suddenly　became　the　target　of　all　eyes.　She　was　now　no　longer　a　peace-loving　old　Japanese　woman　with　ideals;　she　was　a　Japanese　and　the　symbol　of　force，　invasion，　and　slaughter.　Those　eyes　all　carried　the　fire　of　hate　and　bored　into　her.　What　should　she　do？　She　could　not　defend　herself　with　words.　Words　on　the　day　of　settlement　were　of　no　use.　She　knew　she　had　no　guilt　but　she　could　not　speak.　It　seemed　that　she　had　to　share　in　the　crime　of　the　Japanese　militarists.　In　spite　of　the　fact　that　her　ideals　were　above　national　boundaries　and　race　she　had　—　pecause　of　her　country　and　her　race　—　to　be　charged　with　the　crime.

She　looked　at　the　people　before　her　and　suddenly　felt　that　she　did　not　know　them.　They　were　no　longer　her　neighbors　but　people　who　hated　her　and　perhaps　even　wanted　to　kill　her.　She　knew　that　these　neighbors　were　gentle　people　and　easy　to　deal　with，　yet　who　could　guarantee　that　today　they　would　not　become　delirious　and　want　revenge？

Yun　Mei　had　stopped　weeping.　She　went　to　her　grandfather　and　took　Niu　Niu　from　him.　What　had　victory　to　do　with　her？　She　asked　only　to　hold　Niu　Niu　a　little　longer.

Holding　Niu　Niu's　little　dead　body　tightly　Yun　Mei　walked　slowly　back　into　the　courtyard.　She　bent　her　head　and　looked　at　Niu　Niu's　greyish，　thin，　and　quiet　little　face，　and　called　in　a　low　voice，　“Niu　Niu，”　as　if　Niu　Niu　were　only　sleeping.

Old　Man　Chi　turned　and　followed　her.　“Mother　of　Little　Precious　，did　you　hear？　Japan　has　surrendered.　Mother　of　Little　Precious，　don't　weep　any　more.　We　have　good　days　before　us.　Just　now　I　was　out　of　my　mind　with　grief.　I　wanted　to　take　Niu　Niu　to　find　the　Japanese.　I　was　wrong.　I　should　not　have　thought　of　desecrating　Niu　Niu　that　way.　Mother　of　Little　Precious，　find　some　clean　clothes　for　Niu　Niu，　wash　her　face.　Don't　let　her　enter　her　little　coffin　with　tears　on　her　face.　Mother　of　Little　Precious，　don't　worry.　The　Japanese　devils　will　soon　have　all　rolled　away，　and　we　will　be　able，　peacefully　and　happily，　to　live　our　lives.　You　and　the　Eldest　are　still　young　and　can　bear　more　children.”

Yun　Mei　seemed　not　to　hear　the　old　man's　pleading，　his　efforts　to　comfort　her.　She　walked　forward　slowly，　calling　in　a　low　voice，　“Niu　Niu.”

Mrs.　Tien　Yiu　was　still　standing　in　the　courtyard，　and　when　she　saw　Yun　Mei　she　followed　her.　She　seemed　to　know　that　Yun　Mei　would　not　be　willing　to　let　her　take　Niu　Niu，　so　she　only　followed　her　daughter-in-law.

Fourth　Mistress　Li　had　been　standing　with　Mrs.　Tien　Yiu　and　now　without　thinking　she　followed　the　mother　and　daughter-in-law.　The　three　women　slowly　went　into　the　room.

At　this　moment　—　beyond　the　screen　—　the　storyteller　Fang　the　Sixth　said　loudly　to　his　neighbors，　“Neighbors，　we　should　today　take　our　revenge.”　The　words　were　addresed　to　all　the　neighbors　but　his　eyes　were　on　the　old　Japanese　woman.

All　heard　the　words　of　Fang　the　Sixth　but　did　not　understand　what　he　meant.　They　were　all　people　of　Peiping　who　could　bear　disaster　with　patience　and　who　did　not　think　of　vengeance　when　the　disaster　had　passed.　They　always　followed　history　but　never　thought　of　creating　or　changing　history.　Even　when　contrary　winds　blew　they　would　still　live　by　their　never-changing　philosophy　for　living　in　the　world.　Behind　this　philosophy　was　the　belief　that　evil　had　its　own　evil　reward　—　there　was　no　need　for　them　to　strike　back　at　their　enemies.　How　terrible　the　Japanese　had　been　—　yet　Japan　had　surrendered.　Eight　years　of　occupation，　how　long　that　had　been！　But　compared　with　the　six　or　seven　hundred　years　of　the　history　of　Peiping，　what　did　eight　years　count？　No　one　moved.

Fang　the　Sixth　began　to　explain　to　them，　“We　have　had　eight　years　of　suffering，　and　not　a　day　on　which　anyone　dared　say　that　his　head　would　not　come　off　his　body.　Should　we　not　today　give　them　a　little　bitterness　to　eat？　Even　if　you　dare　not　kill　should　you　not　at　least　spit　upon　them？”

The　always　mild　and　gentle　Cheng　Chang　Shun　agreed　with　Fang　the　Sixth.　“Right，　even　if　we　don't　beat　or　kill　them，　should　we　not　spit　squarely　in　their　faces？”　In　his　nasal　tones　he　shouted，　“Come　on！”

All　started　toward　the　old　Japanese　woman.　She　did　not　understand　what　they　had　been　saying　but　she　could　see　that　their　attitude　was　hostile.　She　wanted　to　walk　away　but　she　did　not　move.　She　straightened　her　back　and　waited　bravely　for　their　attack.　She　must　suffer　their　insults　and　blows;　only　so　could　she　lessen　her　guilt　and　that　of　the　other　Japanese.

Rey　Shuan　had　been　sitting　all　this　time　on　the　ground　as　though　he　had　lost　comsciousness.　Suddenly　he　stood　up　and　with　one　step　came　between　the　old　woman　and　the　crowd.　His　face　still　had　no　color，　but　his　eyes　were　bright.　Lifting　his　chest　he　seemed　suddenly　taller.　Determined　but　still　gentle，　he　said，　“What　are　you　planning　to　do？”

None　of　them，　not　even　Fang　the　Sixth，　dared　reply.　Chinese　respect　men　of　scholarship.　Rey　Shuan　fitted　their　ideal　and　was　the　only　one　among　them　who　was　educated.

“Are　you　planning　first　to　beat　this　old　lady？”　Rey　Shuan　emphasized　the　words　“old　lady.”

Everyone　looked　at　Rey　Shuan　and　looked　at　the　old　Japanese　woman.　Fang　the　Sixth　was　the　first　to　shake　his　head.　No　one　was　willing　to　hurt　an　old　woman.

Rey　Shuan　turned　and　said　to　the　Japanese　woman，　“You　had　better　go.”

The　old　woman　sighed，　bowed　to　all，　turned　and　walked　away.

After　the　old　woman　had　gone　John　Ting　came　in.

As　soon　as　he　saw　John　Ting　come　in　Fang　the　Sixth　thought　he　had　reinforcements.　Ever　since　the　defeat　of　Germany，　John　Ting　had　told　them　all　that　when　Japan　was　defeated　they　should　deal　properly　with　the　Japanese　in　Peiping.

“John，　what　do　you　think？　Should　we　not　go　to　house　Number　Three　and　give　those　Japanese　a　lesson？”

“What's　happened？”　John　Ting　had　not　heard　the　news.

“Japan　is　finished，　surrendered，”　Fang　the　Sixth　answered　in　a　loud　voice.

John　Ting　closed　his　eyes　as　he　was　in　the　habit　of　doing　in　church　when　he　said　“Amen.”　Then　without　a　word　he　turned　and　started　to　run.

“Where　are　you　going？”　Rey　Shuan　asked　him.

“I—I'm　going　to　the　English　Palace，”　John　Ting　shouted.





