Chapter　Sixteen


THE　MONK，Clear　Moon，again　took　a　message　to　Rey　Shuan.“To　go　is　dangerous.Not　to　go　is　also　dangerous.I　only　hope　that　you　will　find　new　life　since　the　old　road　has　come　to　a　dead　end.In　war　one　must　take　sides.To　stand　in　the　middle　is　perhaps　worse　than　to　be　a　traitor.”

When　Rey　Shuan　read　this　letter　that　had　no　head　or　tail　or　signature　he　could　not　help　smiling.　He　waited　calmly　for　the　document　of　invitation　from　the　school.　He　decided　that　when　it　came　he　would　go　and　teach　even　if　it　should　become　his　execution　ground.

There　had　been　four　years　of　war　and　this　was　the　first　time　that　he　had　felt　decisive，and　also　happy.He　was　standing　side　by　side　with　Old　Three，and　even　if　this　should　involve　the　whole　family，and　they　should　all　die　together，he　would　not　retreat.

The　invitation　came.　Lan　the　Eastern　Sun's　signature　and　seal　were　on　it.If　this　had　happened　in　the　past　Rey　Shuan　would　have　felt　the　greatest　shame　and　humiliation.He　would　rather　have　starved　than　call　Eastern　Sun　“Headmaster.”　But　on　this　day　he　was　elated.

The　family，　learning　the　good　news，pushed　forward　to　ask　all　about　the　new　post.Rey　Shuan　told　them　only　that　he　had　a　new　job　and　that　there　was　hope　for　grain.He　did　not　say　how　he　got　the　job　or　who　was　the　headmaster　of　the　school.

When　Old　Man　Chi　heard　the　good　news　he　twisted　his　white　eyebrows　and　nodded　his　head　continuously，and　smacked　his　lips.“Ai，the　Old　Heaven　has　eyes，the　Old　Heaven　has　eyes.”

Rey　Shuan　looked　at　his　grandfather　and　felt　that　he　was　no　longer　on　the　borer　line　between　Yin　and　Yang　—　between　the　shades　and　life　—　but　that　he　was　alive　again.He　did　not　know　whether　he　should　laugh　or　cry.

Fat　Chrysanthemum　hoped　that　she　could　with　politeness　and　patience　appease　Rey　Shuan　so　that　he　would　understand　that　she　still　regarded　him　as　her　eldest　brother，and　would　forget　that　matter　of　the　Second.She　hoped　that　the　Chi　family　would　become　friendly　with　the　Lan　family，that　Eastern　Sun　could　still　keep　the　position　of　headmaster　in　the　school，and　that　she　could　still　keep　the　key　of　the　treasury.

She　felt　that　her　plan　was　entirely　reasonable　and　righteous.When　Rey　Tang　had　slapped　her，her　first　thought　had　been　for　revenge.She　had　told　Eastern　Sun　to　go　at　once　and　report，and　have　the　gates　of　the　city　closed　to　catch　Rey　Tang，and　then　to　have　the　whole　Chi　family　put　to　death.The　pain　and　insult　to　her　fat　face　could　only　be　washed　clean　by　the　blood　of　the　Chi　family.

But　as　soon　as　Eastern　Sun　saw　the　cartridge　and　Meydee's　ring　he　was　so　frightened　that　he　wet　his　trousers.Eastern　Sun's　success　depended　on　two　things:his　own　shamelessness　and　the　tameness　of　the　people　of　Peiping.Now　as　he　looked　at　that　cartridge　he　saw　a　man　of　Peiping　who　dared　to　risk　his　life.A　white　frost　covered　his　green　face，both　his　eyeballs　rolled　up.He　saw　danger　and　death　and　he　was　afraid　of　death.

He　quickly　shut　the　gate　and　had　the　door　of　his　room　and　the　windows　bolted　and　locked.After　he　had　closed　the　door　and　the　windows　tightly　he　put　his　trem　fingers　to　his　lips　and　cruelly　bit　his　nails.His　first　thought　was　to　ask　the　Japanese　to　protect　him.　Suppose　a　squad，or　better　still　a　company，　of　infantry　were　around　his　house　he　could　probably　lie　on　his　high　pillows　without　worry.　But　could　that　be　done？If　he　should　ask　for　protection　and　the　Japanese　sent　only　one　or　two　members　of　the　secret　service　—　of　what　use　would　that　be？

He　thought　it　over　and　over　and　decided　that　the　best　way　was:first，to　ask　for　a　few　days'　sick　leave　and　lock　himself　in　his　room;second，to　think　of　a　way　to　make　a　compromise　with　Rey　Tang;third，if　Rey　Tang　would　not　compromise　he　would　think　up　a　way　to　get　to　Japan.He　could　not　always　stay　in　Peiping　waiting　for　a　bullet.

Fat　Chrysanthemum　seeing　that　Eastern　Sun　was　so　frightened　could　only　rub　her　face　and　think　of　delaying　tactics.She　must　go　to　the　Chi　family.If　she　bought　some　gifts　for　the　old　and　young　they　would　surely　be　grateful　to　her，and　perhaps　in　the　course　of　the　conversation　she　would　get　some　real　news　about　Old　Three.Even　if　they　were　very　careful　and　did　not　talk　about　Old　Three　she　could　at　least　watch　their　words　and　expressions　and　look　through　the　crevices.　Even　if　she　saw　nothing　at　all　it　would　do　no　harm　to　restore　“good　relations　between　the　two　nations，”and　after　the　restoration　of　relations　she　would　gradually　persuade　them　to　co-operate　with　her.

She　bought　two　or　three　gifts　and　took　them　herself　to　the　Chi　family.She　thought　herself　both　courageous　and　intelligent.

Entering　the　Little　Sheep　Fold　she　looked　all　around.Everything　in　the　Little　Sheep　Fold　was　the　same　except　that　the　walls　and　gates　were　older　and　shabbier　and　looked　like　the　slums　in　the　movies.　She　felt　that　she　had　been　very　intelligent　to　have　escaped　from　this　slum;otherwise　she　would　have　been　no　more　than　a　flower　stuck　in　a　pile　of　dog's　dung.

Since　the　sunshine　was　warm　Mrs.Tien　Yiu　was　sitting　on　the　threshold　of　her　room　enjoying　the　sun.　The　two　children　were　in　front　of　the　steps.　Little　Niu　Niu　was　so　undernourished　she　seemed　to　have　forgotten　how　to　play　and　was　standing　idly　watching　her　brother.　Little　Precious　was　also　very　thin　but　he　could　still　jump　about　and　play.

The　two　children　saw　Chrysanthemum　first.They　did　not　remember　her　very　well.In　their　daily　chatter　they　still　spoke　of　their　“fat　aunt”　but　her　appearance　had　gradually　blurred　in　their　little　minds.Little　Precious　said　only，“Yo！”　and　nothing　else.

Mrs.Tien　Yiu　slowly　opened　her　eyes　and　recognized　Chrysanthemum　at　a　glance.She　stood　up　and　said，“Little　Precious，Niu　Niu，come　in，　both　of　you.”　Then　taking　the　hands　of　the　two　children　she　went　into　her　room.　The　old　lady　knew　how　to　maintain　good　feeling　in　the　four　generations　in　the　same　house，but　she　could　not　tolerate　a　loose　woman　like　Fat　Chrysanthemum.Fat　Chrysanthemum　became　angry.She　had　thought　that　the　old　lady　would　accept　the　face　she　offered.

No，she　must　not　be　angry.　A　diplomat　could　not　afford　to　be　angry，and　she　had　come　to　restore　diplomatic　relations.She　called，“Eldest　Sister-in-law.”　She　knew　that　the　sister-in-law　was　easier　to　deal　with.

Yun　Mei　was　in　the　kitchen　and　without　looking　out　had　already　recognized　Chrysanthemum　by　her　voice.The　color　of　her　face　changed　immediately.She　never　wanted　to　offend　anyone　but　she　also　made　a　clear　distinction　between　right　and　wrong.Should　she　or　should　she　not　go　out　and　greet　that　fat　sister-in-law？

She　also　knew　that　“when　the　owl　comes　to　the　house　it　is　not　for　nothing”　applied　to　Fat　Chrysanthemum，but　what　the　business　was　she　could　not　guess.She　decided　not　to　make　any　sound.If　Fat　Chrysanthemum　had　come　to　make　trouble　she　would　be　greeting　a　shameless　woman　and　at　the　same　time　getting　herself　involved　in　the　trouble.

Old　Man　Chi　heard　that　“Eldest　Sister-in-law”and　thinking　that　guests　had　come　slowly　opened　the　door　of　his　room.When　the　old　man　saw　Chrysanthemum　he　looked　quickly　at　the　sky　as　if　to　ask　the　Old　Heavenly　Grandfather　for　instructions　as　to　how　to　deal　with　this　woman.

“Grandfather，I　have　brought　you　a　present.”Fat　Chrysanthemum　was　determined　to　control　her　anger　and　display　her　diplomatic　skill.

The　old　man's　bearded　mouth　moved　several　times　without　being　able　to　say　anything.

Fat　Chrysanthemum　started　to　go　into　the　old　man's　room.She　held　the　gifts　in　front　of　her　to　attract　his　attention.

The　old　man　stopped　her.　With　a　loud　voice　he　said，“Roll！”Then　his　speech　spurted　like　water　from　a　pump，“Roll　away！Get　out！You　have　the　face　to　come　here　and　bring　gifts　to　me.　If　I　should　accept　your　presents　my　ancestors　could　not　lie　quietly　in　their　graves.Roll！”

At　this　moment　Yun　Mei　came　out　of　the　kitchen.She　was　afraid　the　fat　woman　would　say　something　that　the　old　man　could　not　endure.　Standing　in　the　door　of　the　kitchen　she　said　in　a　loud　voice，“You　haven't　gone　yet？Go！”

Fat　Chrysanthemum　had　no　choice　but　to　turn　around.She　first　thought　to　throw　the　presents　on　the　ground　as　an　insult，but　she　hesitated　and　then　held　them　more　tightly.

Yun　Mei　came　quickly　over　and　said　to　the　grandfather，“Grandfather，you'd　better　rest　a　bit.”

The　old　man　still　had　much　he　wanted　to　say，but　he　was　so　angry　and　confused　he　said　not　a　word.

When　Rey　Shuan　came　home　and　heard　the　report　from　the　family　he　said　to　himself，“Not　bad，the　Chi　family　have　bones　after　all.”





