1


It　was　the　summer　of　1938.　The　military　situation　in　Hankow　was　critical.

The　muddy　brown　water　of　the　Yangtze　River　flowed　swiftly　east,　but　the　refugees　were　fighting　their　way　in　the　opposite　direction,　a　motley　exodus　of　human　misery.　Planes　with　red　suns　marked　on　the　underside　of　their　wings　dropped　bombs　incessantly.　The　bombs　fell　with　a　sickly　swish.　As　they　hit　the　surface　of　the　river,　they　threw　up　splashes　sky_high　tinged　with　human　blood.

The　“People's　Peace",　a　small　white　river　steamer,was　sailing　up　the　river.　She　was　loaded　to　capacity　with　refugees.　With　rapid　puffs　of　black　smoke　from　her　funnels,　she　edged　into　the　first　of　the　“seventy_two　gorges"　that　lay　imprisoned　by　the　high　steep　cliffs.　The　“People's　Peace"　was　going　to　Chungking.

The　cabins　and　the　holds　were　crowded　with　people.　There　was　not　an　inch　of　space　left　on　deck.　Under　the　smoke_belching　funnels　crowded　fifty　or　sixty　tiny　bewildered　children　who　had　lost　their　homes　and　parents.　They　were　all　smothered　with　soot　and　dust,　and　looked　as　though　they　had　just　come　out　of　a　coal　mine.

The　broad　sweep　of　the　Yangtze　behaved　like　an　angry　dragon　which　crashed　against　the　rock_studded　banks　on　the　left,　then　swung　sharply　over　to　the　right,　turning　and　twisting　furiously　in　the　midst　of　the　mountains.　After　one　perilous　gorge　was　passed,　there　was　always　another.　Then　the　river　would　shoot　abruptly　downwards　and　the　ships　turned　and　twisted　like　a　wriggling　worm　in　a　life_and_death　struggle.　Each　time　the　ship's　whistle　blew,　everyone　on　board　held　his　breath　expecting　the　worst.

Once　a　menacing　gorge　was　passed　the　people　on　the　ship　relaxed.　It　was　like　a　breathing　spell　in　a　strenuous　wrestling　match.　Some　of　them　turned　around　and　watched　the　patterns　of　waves　and　currents　near　the　banks.　They　saw　the　bodies　of　people　and　buffaloes　whirling　around　in　the　water,　showing　just　the　top　of　their　black　hair,　or　two　long　rapidly　twisting　horns.

Sometimes　the　crowded　vessel　slipped　into　a　violent　roll　as　it　pitched　along　against　the　current.　Then　the　water　came　over　the　sides　to　swamp　everyone　on　deck.

When　the　steep　sharp_edged　cliffs　lining　the　riverbanks　shut　off　the　sunlight,　the　cold　chill　of　the　wind　made　the　passengers　shiver.　Once　or　twice,a　streak　of　sunlight　appeared　through　a　gap　between　the　rocks　and　conjured　up　a　strangely　beautiful　rainbow　on　the　turgid　surface　of　the　river.

Every　green　hill,every　rising　slope　on　either　shore　of　the　mighty　river　had　a　different　name.　And　each　was　a　different　shape　but　all　a　part　of　the　vast　panorama　of　shifting　patterns.　Every　song　of　the　river's　treacherous　beauty　had　been　set　in　music,　and　each　one　of　its　incredible　legends　told　in　poetry.　These　voyagers　from　war　cared　little　for　that,　though　they　moved　through　the　ageless　beauty　of　China's　history　between　the　summits　of　the　great　mountains　where　the　ancient　emperors　were　said　to　have　made　love　to　the　angels　and　thus　created　their　divine　inheritance.

But　the　refugees　had　neither　the　leisure　nor　the　space　to　stand　by　the　railings　to　appreciate　the　beauties　of　the　landscape.　All　the　passengers,rich　and　poor,old　and　young,　were　overawed　by　the　threat　of　danger　and　the　uncertainty　of　the　future.　In　particular,they　were　aware　of　the　acute　discomfort.　Those　in　the　cabins　could　not　get　out　because　the　decks　were　jammed　with　people　and　mountainous　piles　of　luggage.　The　people　on　deck　could　not　move　either　because　there　was　no　room,　not　even　to　breathe　or　to　stand　on　one　leg　and　then　on　the　other.　Everyone　was　wedged　tightly　in　a　solid　mass　all　day,　but　the　tired　waiters　somehow　kept　passing　food　and　rice　to　the　passengers.　They　walked　barefoot,　their　muddy　sooty　feet　soiling　everything　they　touched　and　making　little　mud　pies　on　the　bedding　and　bundles.　They　could　not　walk　on　the　deck,　so　they　stepped　where　they　could　—　on　the　faces　and　bodies　of　the　passengers.　Anyone　who　got　stepped　on　squealed　and　cursed,　adding　to　the　confusion　and　misery.

Few　people　were　at　peace　on　board　the　“People's　Peace".　They　were　either　annoyed,　angry,　or　sad.　Not　even　the　occasionally　beautiful　vista　of　the　green　mountains　that　came　into　sight　exalted　them.　Life　was　too　grim　and　too　overladen　with　inconveniences　and　sorrows.

Only　one　person　among　the　passengers　seemed　to　be　neither　sad　nor　worried,　although　he,　like　all　the　others,was　enduring　the　same　misfortunes　of　war,　the　difficulties　and　uncertainties　of　the　journey.

Fang　Pao　Ching　was　in　his　forties.　He　earned　his　rice　by　singing　folk　songs　and　telling　tales　in　tea　houses　accompanied　by　a　drum　the　size　of　a　tea　tray,　a　pair　of　castanets,　and　a　three_stringed　instrument　called　san_hsien.　He　was　a　troubadour,　always　on　his　way　to　somewhere.　He　took　his　whole　family　with　him.　They　were　with　him　now.　The　one　who　lay　on　the　sooty　deck　groaning　“Ai_ya"　each　time　the　boat　tossed　was　his　elder　brother.　He　was　known　as　“Useless　Fang."　And　useless　he　was　indeed,　for　he　did　nothing　but　groan　all　day.

The　middle_aged　woman　who　huddled　next　to　Useless　Fang　with　her　plump　back　against　the　cabin　wall,　a　bottle　of　liquor　in　her　hand,　was　Fang　Pao　Ching's　wife.　Her　eyes　were　watering　and　her　voice　raised　in　a　curse　at　someone　nearby.

Not　far　from　Mrs.　Fang,　propped　up　in　a　half_lying　half_sitting　position　and　looking　utterly　miserable　and　untidy,　was　the　Fangs'　own　daughter,Phoenix　Girl.

On　deck　near　the　rail　sat　a　young　girl　of　fourteen.　She　was　the　Fangs'　adopted　daughter,　Lotus　Charm.　Lotus　Charm,　like　her　father,sang　in　tea　houses　for　a　living.　Now,　with　a　serene　patient　expression　on　her　delicate　face,　she　was　playing　domino　solitaire.　Every　time　the　boat　tossed,　Useless　Fang　groaned　and　Lotus　Charm　cursed　because　the　movement　of　the　ship　had　upset　her　dominoes.　But　her　words,　spoken　in　a　low　voice,　were　not　rude　or　vulgar.

Fang　Pao　Ching　did　not　want　to　sit　with　his　family,　for　he　liked　to　move　around　and　could　not　bear　listening　to　his　brother's　groaning　or　his　wife's　constant　complaining.

Although　he　was　already　in　his　forties　and　had　experienced　many　things　in　his　troubadour's　life,　Fang　Pao　Ching　was　still　innocent　of　face　and　manner　—　even　his　way　of　talking　and　his　gestures　were　always　kindly.　He　was　not　a　stupid　person,　otherwise　he　could　not　have　made　such　a　comfortable　living　all　these　years.　But　he　could　be　as　innocent,　naive,　and　troublesome　as　a　ten_year_old　child　and　be　genuine　about　it.　It　was　no　act　or　pretension　when　he　stuck　out　his　tongue,　lifted　his　shoulder　on　one　side,　made　a　face　or　laughed　out　loud　like　an　idiot.　It　was　all　very　convincing.　He　did　it　for　his　own　amusement.　His　artfulness　and　his　innocence　mixed　as　unobtrusively　as　a　beaten　egg,　where　neither　the　yolk　nor　the　white　can　be　distinguished　one　from　the　other.

When　the　Japanese　entered　Peiping,　Pao　Ching　took　his　family　to　Shanghai.　Then　when　Shanghai　fell,　they　went　to　Hankow.　And　now,　as　the　enemy　was　pressing　in　on　the　outskirts　of　Hankow,　he　and　his　family　were　among　the　mass　exodus　to　Chungking.　Peiping　was　Pao　Ching's　home.　The　songs　he　sang　were　full　of　Peiping　color.　He　could　very　easily　have　stayed　in　Peiping　instead　of　going　through　the　tortures　and　uncertainties　of　being　one　of　millions　of　refugees.　Innocent_faced　Pao　Ching　was　practically　illiterate,　but　he　was　one　of　the　comparatively　few　singers　in　Peiping　who　could　read　a　few　words,　though　not　many.　The　enemy　would　never　dream　of　killing　him.　But　he　preferred　to　part　with　his　sumptuous　home　and　precious　possessions　rather　than　to　make　a　living　in　cities　where　the　Japanese　flag　flew.　He　was　full　of　naive　innocence.　He　did　not　know　whether　he　was　patriotic　or　not.　He　just　knew　that　whenever　he　saw　by　chance　the　flag　of　his　own　country,　his　throat　became　dry　and　lumpy,　as　if　something　were　turning　inside　him.

The　one　person　in　the　group　most　opposed　to　the　idea　of　leaving　Peiping　was　Useless　Fang.　He　was　only　five　years　older　than　his　brother,　but　he　felt　he　was　the　elder　and　as　such　he　should　be　respected.　Above　all,　he　demanded　that　his　peace　at　home　should　not　be　disturbed.　He　was　afraid　that　he　might　die　away　from　home.　His　continual　groaning　uttered　in　the　most　dreary　fashion　did　not　mean　he　was　suffering　from　any　physical　pain　—　it　was　just　his　way　of　letting　Pao　Ching　know　that　he　had　not　changed　his　mind.

Mrs.Fang　did　not　mind　leaving　Peiping,　Shanghai,　or　Hankow.　Her　only　objection　was　that　her　husband　decided　to　leave　each　city　at　the　last　moment,　which　never　gave　her　a　chance　to　pack　all　the　belongings　she　wished　to　keep.　She　had　never　given　a　thought　to　the　difficulties　or　inconveniences　of　wartime　transportation.　Now,　between　sips　at　her　bottle,　she　was　thinking　of　an　old　pair　of　comfortable　shoes　and　worn　stockings　whick　she　wished　she　had　brought　with　her.　But　she　had　left　when　the　others　did,　though　she　felt　sad　when　she　had　to　leave　her　belongings　behind.　She　liked　to　drink,　but　when　she　did,　she　felt　even　sadder　and　often　allowed　her　tongue　to　run　away　with　her.

Pao　Ching　did　not　want　to　hear　his　brother's　groaning　nor　his　wife's　nagging.　All　day　long,　he　would　push　and　stagger　his　way　around　the　deck　swaying　this　way　and　that　way　with　each　movement　of　the　ship.　This　was　a　most　uncomfortable　form　of　exercise;　besides　he　was　always　in　danger　of　losing　a　big　toe,　should　one　of　the　sleepers　over　whom　he　walked　suddenly　decide　to　close　his　mouth.

He　did　not　took　a　bit　like　a　showman.He　was　neither　extremely　handsome　nor　repulsively　ugly.　He　was　just　as　ordinary　as　a　clerk　in　a　pawnshop　or　a　department　store.　There　was　nothing　in　his　manner　eccentric　enough　to　make　him　appear　to　be　a　showman.　Nor　was　he　like　certain　fine　artists　who　need　no　eccentricity　to　prove　their　genius　or　integrity.　The　fragment　of　showmanship　which　he　sometimes　revealed　only　served　to　puzzle　the　people　who　tried　to　guess　his　profession.

He　was　not　a　tall　man,　but　his　body　was　well_covered　with　flesh　and　muscle.　His　stockiness　made　him　appear　sometimes　slow　and　heavy.　But　when　he　wanted　to,　he　could　be　as　nimble　and　active　as　a　monkey.　With　him,　you　could　never　guess　whether　he　would　jump　over　a　puddle,　or　walk　right　into　it　letting　his　shoes　soak　in　the　water.

His　head　was　round,　and　usually　shaven　and　shiny.　His　eyes,　ears,　and　mouth　were　all　large,　so　large　that　they　appeared　to　be　hanging　loosely　on　his　head.　Fortunately,　his　eyebrows　were　dark　and　heavy　as　though　put　there　to　maintain　his　dignity　and　to　protect　the　loose　flesh　on　his　face　from　ridicule.　They　were　like　two　streaks　of　dark　cloud　in　the　sky,　and　he　had　a　way　of　moving　them　to　make　people　think　they　might　strike　like　lightning.

He　had　a　fine　set　of　teeth　which　showed　all　the　time,　because　he　liked　to　smile.　His　nose　was　ordinary,　but　his　lips　were　always　smooth　and　red　and　bright.　Those　red　lips　made　him　look　young　in　spite　of　the　telltale　middle_aged　wrinkles　under　his　eyes.

Now,　like　the　waiters,　he　was　stepping　round　the　crowded　deck　in　his　bare　feet.　The　boat　was　unsteady.　He　did　his　best　to　avoid　stepping　on　people.　That　was　why　he　was　barefoot.　People　excused　you　more　readily　if　they　were　trodden　on　by　a　pair　of　bare　feet　than　by　a　pair　of　feet　in　heavy　shoes.

He　rolled　up　his　pants,　revealing　his　thick　white　calves.　He　was　wearing　an　old　blue　silk　long　gown,　the　corners　of　which　he　held　up　so　they　would　not　brush　the　faces　of　the　people　lying　on　deck　and　also　allow　him　to　move　more　freely.

He　held　the　hems　of　his　gown　with　one　hand,　and　used　the　other　to　hail　his　friends.　He　was　so　used　to　performing　that　he　automatically　thought　everybody　round　him　was　an　audience,　to　which　he　should　smile　or　make　friendly　gestures.　And　so　he　moved　around　the　boat,　one　hand　holding　his　gown,　the　other　waving　to　the　passengers,　and　his　feet　moving　in　the　same　fashion　as　if　he　were　crossing　a　brook　or　dancing　a　gavotte.

He　was　used　to　having　his　head　shaved　every　two　or　three　days　to　keep　it　absolutely　shiny　and　bald.　His　bald　head　was　his　trademark.　Anyone　who　had　heard　him　sing　remembered　that.　His　face　had　never　been　the　center　of　attraction　as　had　his　head,　which　had　brought　him　many　encores.　Now　that　he　had　not　shaved　it　for　over　a　week,　he　scratched　the　annoying　short　stubble　as　he　made　his　way　across　the　decks.

He　had　made　the　acquaintance　of　almost　all　his　fellow　passengers　within　a　few　hours　after　boarding　the　“People's　Peace".　Soon　he　was　behaving　as　though　he　were　the　man　who　had　supervised　the　building　of　the　ship.　He　knew　every　corner　of　it,　and　exactly　where　everything　was.　He　knew　where　to　get　liquor　for　his　wife　so　she　would　go　to　sleep　instead　of　pointing　her　finger　at　him,　and　where　to　get　a　bowl　of　noodle　soup　for　his　brother　Useless　Fang　to　stop　him　from　groaning.　Like　the　magicians　who　could　produce　rabbits　and　birds　from　thin　air,　Pao　Ching　could　produce　aspirin　tablets　for　those　passengers　who　suffered　from　headache　or　seasickness　and　special　medicines　for　those　suffering　from　malaria.

It　did　not　require　much　effort　for　him　to　find　out　about　the　people　on　board　ship.　He　seemed　to　know　more　about　them　than　the　captain　himself.　And　the　captain　by　now　was　an　old　friend　of　his　—　this　came　about　because　of　Pao　Ching's　most　precious　possessions:　a　fifty_year_old　handmade　three_stringed　fiddle　and　a　round　flat　drum　the　size　of　a　tea　tray.　These　instruments,　with　which　he　and　Lotus　Charm　made　a　living　to　support　themselves　and　the　entire　family,　could　only　be　bought　in　Peiping.　If　he　had　broken　them　now,　he　could　never　hope　to　replace　them.　That　was　why　the　minute　he　arrived　on　the　boat,　he　left　the　instruments　with　the　captain　for　safekeeping.　The　captain　had　never　met　him　before,　and　was　under　no　obligation　to　look　after　a　fiddle　and　a　drum　for　a　tea　house　singer　when　he　was　already　so　occupied　with　his　own　duties.　But　Pao　Ching　seemed　to　have　a　magic　influence.　He　made　his　way　into　the　captain's　cabin　like　a　sneaky　warm　spring　breeze,　and　made　the　captain　feel　it　an　honor　to　be　given　the　custody　of　his　fiddle　and　drum.

Pao　Ching　did　not　get　very　far　in　dancing　his　gavotte.　He　halted　every　few　steps　he　took,　sometimes　by　his　own　will　but　mostly　because　he　was　called　by　a　fellow　passenger.　One　person　asked　him　for　a　few　aspirin　tablets.　Another　wanted　a　headache　powder.　Others　grabbed　hold　of　his　sleeves　and　asked　him　to　tell　them　a　joke.　He　paused　whenever　he　felt　like　it,　which　was　usually　when　he　wanted　to　borrow　a　deck　of　cards　or　to　know　the　time.　When　at　last　he　found　he　had　nothing　else　to　do,　he　climbed　the　narrow　iron　stairs　to　the　top　deck　to　look　at　the　smoke_covered　children　under　the　funnels　which　nobody　seemed　to　care　about.

Pao　Ching　had　no　sons　of　his　own.　He　liked　boys　more　than　he　did　girls,　and　it　pleased　him　to　notice　that　most　of　these　sooty　miserable　children　were　boys.　His　big　round　eyes　moistened　at　the　sight　of　them.　Thinking　of　the　many　sad　songs　and　stories　he　had　sung　and　told　during　his　performances,　he　could　well　imagine　what　heartbreaking　experiences　these　poor　creatures　had　gone　through　when　they　lost　their　parents　in　the　great　turmoil　and　how　they　starved　and　shivered　without　food　and　clothing,　all　the　way　from　Shanghai　or　Nanking,then　now　to　Szechwan.

He　wished　he　could　produce　three　or　four　hundred　steaming_hot　meat　dumplings　to　give　to　these　sickly　black　little　angels.　But,　alas,　he　had　nothing　to　give.　The　only　valuable　possessions　he　had　were　the　fiddle　and　the　drum　and　they　were　in　the　safe_keeping　of　the　ship's　captain.

He　had　intended　to　sing　a　song　or　to　tell　a　few　stories　to　the　children.　But　he　could　not　open　his　mouth　because　he　was　so　choked　with　emotion.　The　ready　smile　and　easy　friendliness　which　he　had　acquired　in　his　years　as　a　traveling　troubadour　were　useless　before　these　suffering　children.　No,　he　could　not　give　them　his　stage　smile.　He　just　stood　there　quietly,　looking　foolish　as　his　bare　bald　head　was　slowly　being　given　a　coat　of　the　thick　black　soot　from　the　belching　funnels.

The　sight　of　these　children　made　him　think　of　his　adopted　daughter　Lotus　Charm.　He　had　bought　her　when　she　was　seven　from　a　very　thin　man　who　called　himself　her　uncle　and　who　accepted　twenty　dollars　in　payment.　She　had　looked　just　like　these　children　so　sick,　so　dirty,　and　so　thin　that　he　wondered　how　much　longer　she　could　live.

It　seemed　like　yesterday.　But　she　was　now　fourteen　years　old.　He　wondered　if　she　still　remembered　her　real　father　and　mother.　Would　she　think　of　him　as　her　real　father？　Would　she　go　off　with　a　rich　man　as　his　concubine？　Or　would　she　run　away　to　marry　a　young　man　of　her　own　choice？　Such　matters,　he　often　pondered　in　his　heart.

His　business　as　well　as　his　reputation　and　the　well_being　of　his　family　were　closely　related　to　Lotus　Charm.　True　that　she　was　only　fourteen　and　still　quite　innocent.　But　she　could　not　remain　fourteen　forever,　and　if　something　should　happen　to　her,　his　entire　family　would　be　faced　with　disaster.

His　entire　family？　His　face　twisted　in　bitterness　as　he　thought　of　them.　That　useless　brother　of　his,　and　his　drunken　wife　and　stupid　daughter　Phoenix　Girl！　How　could　he　keep　Lotus　Charm　from　running　away　from　such　a　family？

He　heard　people　cheer　on　the　deck　below.　He　came　back　from　his　dreams.　He　looked　down.　The　passengers　were　cheering　because　the　ship　had　sailed　out　of　the　last　treacherous　gorge.　The　banks　became　only　gentle　hills　now.　The　river　was　once　again　wide　and　calm.　The　little　white　steamer　was　looking　for　a　place　to　rest.　She　felt　like　a　tired　exhausted　woman.　Slowly　and　wearily,　she　headed　for　a　sand　bank　to　take　her　much-needed　rest.　The　vessel　lowered　her　anchor.　On　the　beach　were　a　few　reed　and　bamboo　booths　already　set　up.

The　sun　was　golden　red　in　the　western　sky　as　the　ship　was　made　fast.　No　one　moved　for　a　moment.　The　captain　and　the　river　pilots　who　had　brought　the　ship　to　safely　through　the　gorges,　and　the　waiters　and　passengers　who　had　been　watching　them,　were　too　tired　to　move.　Even　the　little　white　vessel　itself　seemed　numbed　with　fatigue.

Pao　Ching　brushed　away　the　sooty　specks　from　his　bald　head.　He　opened　his　mouth　wide　and　shouted　to　the　children,　“Come,　come　quick,　all　of　you.　Let's　have　a　swim."

Pushing　through　the　crowd,　he　led　the　children　down　the　gangplank　like　a　string　of　ducks.　They　jumped　into　the　water　with　a　noisy　splash.





