23


Pao　Ching　paid　the　fifty　thousand　dollars.　It　was　inflated　money,　but　since　he　had　earned　it,　it　hurt.　He　paid　up,　and　the　wife　of　the　director　had　Li　Yuan　released.

The　government　office,　however,　did　not　rehire　Li　Yuan,　so　he　had　no　money,　no　place　to　live,　and　nothing　to　eat.　It　was　natural　that　he　come　to　live　with　the　Fang　family.　The　Fangs　ate　well,　and　Pao　Ching　made　money.　Yet　it　was　against　Li　Yuan's　principles;　he　liked　to　have　a　job　and　money　of　his　own.　Before　he　met　Lotus　Charm　he　had　lived　carefully　and　had　kept　accounts　of　everything　he　spent.

Lotus　Charm　was　glad　to　see　him,　but　after　a　few　weeks　she　found　her　friendship　with　him　very　dull.　When　he　was　with　her,　he　always　sat　stiff　and　erect,　not　even　venturing　to　put　his　hand　on　hers.　And　he　sat　for　a　long　time,　only　getting　up　to　go　out　and　look　for　a　job　—　which　he　never　found.　Lotus　Charm　became　bored.　She　did　not,　however,　consider　his　side　of　the　matter:　he　was　hungry　and　miserable　and　ashamed,　wanting　her　so　much　and　not　daring　to　make　an　advance.

Since　Phoenix　Girl　was　soon　to　have　her　baby,　Mrs.　Fang　spent　a　great　deal　of　time　with　her,　much　to　Pao　Ching's　relief.　When　Pao　Ching　gave　his　wife　some　idea　of　his　troubles,　she　laughed,　“Did　I　not　tell　you　to　get　Lotus　Charm　a　husband？　But　you　didn't,　and　you　didn't　sell　her.　She　finds　herself　a　man.　Now,　let　her　take　care　of　herself　..."

After　she　had　had　a　drink　or　two　Mrs.　Fang　became　jubilant　over　her　predictions　about　Lotus　Charm.　“You　can　still　sell　her,"　she　told　Pao　Ching.　“Get　rid　of　her　now,　before　she　gets　into　real　trouble.　If　she　gets　into　the　family　way　or　gets　a　disease　she'll　not　be　worth　a　cent.　Get　that　into　your　stupid　head.　Sell　her　while　she　looks　good."　Then　she　swept　her　heavy　black　hair　into　a　bun,　put　on　her　gown　and　went　off　to　see　Phoenix　Girl.

Pao　Ching　knew　she　was　right.　But　he　had　a　problem.　He　could　not　turn　Li　Yuan　out,　since　the　poor　young　man　had　no　job.　Yet　Lotus　Charm　was　in　the　house　most　of　the　day　and　night　with　a　young　man　whom　she　loved.　They　might　be　really　getting　into　trouble.　He　mopped　his　brow.　He　felt　desperately　alone.　From　Useless　Fang　or　Meng　Liang　he　would　have　been　able　to　get　some　good　advice.　Now　he　had　to　find　his　own　solution.　He　certainly　could　not　stay　and　watch　them　all　day,　and　there　was　no　work　he　could　find　for　Li　Yuan.

Perhaps　the　best　thing　to　do,　though,　would　be　to　get　rid　of　the　young　man.　Could　he　find　him　a　job　in　some　other　city,　or　somewhere　beyond　the　reach　of　his　daughter？　If　Li　Yuan　were　out　of　the　way,　he　could　have　a　heart_to_heart　talk　with　Lotus　Charm　and　find　out　the　kind　of　man　she　really　wanted.　But　these　days　he　was　never　alone　with　her,　because　Li　Yuan　followed　her　like　a　shadow.

One　day　as　Pao　Ching　was　walking　along　the　street　he　came　to　an　abrupt　halt.　The　solution　came　to　him:　competition;　another　young　man,　someone　he　could　trust.　He　sought　out　Chang　Wen,　a　handsome　young　man　who　owed　him　for　favors　in　the　past.　Into　Chang　Wen's　hand　Pao　Ching　put　a　sizable　sum　of　money.　Money　would　make　Chang　listen　and　respect　orders.　For　Chang　was　a　secret　agent,　a　man　who　worked　only　for　money,　who　obeyed　only　the　power　of　money.

Chang　Wen　listened　carefully　to　Pao　Ching　and　nodded　to　show　that　he　understood.　He　was　to　watch　over　Li　Yuan　and　Lotus　Charm,　provide　harmless　competition,　and　be　a　friend　and　a　chaperon.　Boss　Fang　did　not　want　LiYuan　to　go　to　bed　with　his　daughter.　Sure,　he　would　see　that　would　not　happen.　Sure.　Boss　Fang　could　rest　happy　on　that　point.　Li　Yuan　wouldn't　have　a　look　in.

Chang　Wen　was　part　of　Republic　China,　a　product　of　the　times.　He　had　been　trained　as　a　boy　by　Chinese　who　had　learned　from　the　Nazis　how　to　mold　youth　under　the　guise　of　patriotism.　From　his　early　teens　Chang　had　been　taught　to　dress　neatly,　to　handle　a　gun,　to　obey　and　command,　to　salute　and　acclaim　whoever　was　his　boss.

There　was　no　faith　in　him,　no　respect　for　his　elders　or　for　the　tradition　of　his　ancestors.　Power　was　his　god.　You　killed　or　you　were　killed.　If　you　were　not　able　by　yourself　to　dispose　of　the　other　fellow,　you　formed　a　gang,　and　had　him　eliminated　before　he　got　you.

He　could　shoot,　could　trail　a　suspect,　and　was　ready　to　work　at　anything　for　money.　At　times　he　had　undertaken　missions　for　the　government.　Now　he　was　waiting　for　a　commision.　Pao　Ching's　assignment　had　come　at　just　the　right　time.　He　remembered　the　little　drum　singer　he　was　to　watch.　A　cute　little　trick,if　he　remembered　rightly.　He　inflated　his　chest.　“Sure,　Boss　Fang,anything　you　say.　I'll　look　after　her　..."

Pao　Ching　was　pleased.　With　Chang　Wen　around　the　house,　Li　Yuan　wouldn't　have　a　chance　to　rush　his　daughter　into　trouble,　and　the　young　people　would　be　able　to　think　things　over.　Perhaps　Li　Yuan　might　even　decide　to　leave,　with　another　man　in　the　house.

What　a　brilliant　stroke　to　think　of　Chang　Wen！　Pao　Ching　could　trust　this　man.　He　considered　Chang　Wen　very　much　as　a　man　that　had　his　usefulness　and　could　be　bought　for　a　price.　The　large　cities　before　the　war　were　full　of　his　sort.　You　gave　them　money　and　told　them　what　to　do,　and　they　did　it.　For　Pao　Ching,　Chang　Wen　was　definitely　a　part　of　the　old　life,　a　hireling.　Having　paid　him　the　money,　he　was　sure　the　young　man　would　do　the　job　efficiently.

“But　no　violence,　my　friend,"　Pao　Ching　warned.　Chang　Wen　nodded.

When　Lotus　Charm　met　Chang　Wen,　her　heart　fluttered.　How　handsome　and　manly！　He　was　like　Little　Liu,　only　much　more　attractive.　While　Little　Liu　was　fragile,　Chang　was　wiry.　His　muscles　stood　out　under　the　sleeves　of　his　shirt,　and　his　black　hair　was　smooth　as　patent　leather,　beautifully　polished.　He　smelled　as　if　he　had　just　stepped　from　a　barber's　shop.　Just　like　a　student,　she　thought,　only　he　is　a　man.　A　real　man.

It　took　Chang　Wen　only　a　few　days　to　find　out　how　Lotus　Charm　felt　about　Li　Yuan.　Why,　all　the　girl　needed　was　a　little　love！　Not　that　Chang　Wen　was　interested,　seeing　he　was　in　a　paid　job,　but　there　was　no　harm　in　showing　her　who　was　the　better　fellow.

And　Li　Yuan　was　sensitive　enough　to　take　a　hint.　Since　Chang　Wen　had　been　calling　each　day　he　took　long　walks,　only　coming　back　for　meals.　Lotus　Charm　didn't　miss　him.　Chang　was　a　charming　companion.　He　did　not　hesitate　to　explain　to　her　the　exact　meaning　of　some　of　the　words　she　used,　and　he　added　a　few　of　his　own.　For　Lotus　Charm　he　was　a　most　desirable　person,　and　he　knew　the　answers　to　all　the　questions.　Why　had　she　ever　been　interested　in　Li　Yuan？

But　sometimes　she　wondered　if　it　was　right　to　talk　so　freely　to　Chang.　She　could　not　help　feeling　that　she　was　amusing　him,　that　she　was　behaving　like　an　entertainer　sitting　on　a　man's　lap,　which　her　father　said　was　not　proper.　And　her　father　had　never　allowed　her　to　joke　with　the　other　girls　backstage.　Yet　she　was　doing　just　that　with　this　handsome　fellow.

There　were　times,　too,　when　she　was　moved　with　compassion　for　Li　Yuan.　He　was　so　wooden　and　simple.　When　she　felt　this　way,　she　wanted　to　strangle　Chang　Wen　as　he　talked　on　and　on,　showing　off　his　knowledge　and　his　sophistication.　It　was　as　if　he　was　cutting　poor　Li　Yuan　with　a　thousand　sharp　whips,　and　Li　Yuan　was　tongue_tied　and　unable　to　fight　back.　But　Chang　Wen　seemed　to　sense　her　every　mood,　and　when　a　shadow　crossed　her　face　he　would　crack　a　joke　that　would　send　her　into　a　fit　of　laughter.　Laughing　at　his　jokes　made　her　feel　she　was　quite　as　intelligent　as　he.

Chang　Wen　was　astute　as　well　as　knowledgeable.　He　soon　found　out　how　many　gold　rings　Lotus　Charm　possessed,　the　exact　number　of　her　bracelets　and　their　worth.　He　was　disappointed　they　were　so　few.　Her　father,　he　always　thought,　was　a　rich　man.　Why　hadn't　he　given　her　more？　“You've　been　singing　for　years,"　he　said.　“Look　at　all　the　money　you've　made　for　him.　If　he'd　only　given　you　two　hundred　dollars　a　month,　you'd　be　a　rich　woman.　He's　cheating　you."

Lotus　Charm　had　never　given　the　matter　thought,　but　Chang　Wen　made　it　sound　convincing.　Her　father　should　have　paid　her.　Why　not？　Other　girls　got　paid.　The　best　thing　for　her　was　to　be　completely　independent.　She　would　have　a　business　arrangement　with　her　father　like　Jeweled　Lute's.　She　thought　the　money　question　over　that　night.　She　had　to　have　money.　If　she　had　money　she　could　marry　an　interesting　man,　and　support　him,　and　no　one　would　worry　about　her　being　an　entertainer.　Poor　Phoenix　Girl　could　not　make　money,　so　she　had　to　marry　whom　her　father　told　her.

That　night　her　mother　went　off　to　see　Phoenix　Girl　with　a　suitcase　packed.　The　baby　was　expected　any　moment.　It　was　a　warm　humid　night,　with　a　hint　of　thunder.　Lotus　Charm　was　frightened　to　go　to　bed　in　case　a　storm　broke.　She　sat　up　long　after　the　show　was　over.　Chang　Wen　never　came　at　night　and　Li　Yuan　was　out.　Finally　her　father　came　in.　“Don't　be　frightened　of　thunder,　daughter,"　he　said.　“It　cannot　hurt　you."

“I　am,　and　I　always　shall　be,"　she　answered,　and　covered　her　head　with　the　sheet.

The　next　morning　was　gray　and　ominous.　The　city　was　so　hot　that　the　air　was　like　damp　cotton.　It　pressed　on　the　face　and　arms　and　made　sweat　roll　off　the　body.　Lotus　Charm　was　sitting　in　her　room,　wearing　only　a　European　pattern　robe　her　father　had　given　her.　It　was　too　hot　to　breathe.　She　was　fanning　herself　with　a　wooden　fan.　Suddenly　the　room　grew　darker,　as　if　someone　had　drawn　a　blind.　Lotus　Charm　walked　to　the　window.　The　sky　was　crowded　with　huge　lead_bellied　clouds,　their　tops　edged　with　silver.　Suddenly　there　was　the　roar　of　thunder.　The　clouds　seemed　to　be　ripped　apart,　as　the　shafts　of　lightning　tore　through　them.　Lotus　Charm　covered　her　face　with　her　hands.　A　storm,　and　she　was　alone.　Her　father　was　out.　Her　mother　was　at　Phoenix　Girl's　helping　with　the　birth.　The　thunder　crashed　again.　She　held　her　breath.　Then　it　seemed　as　if　a　single　raindrop　had　fallen　on　the　roof.　Others　followed,　and　her　ears　filled　with　the　stifling　sound.　Another　flash　of　lightning　set　her　screaming.　She　turned　away　from　the　window　and　ran　straight　into　the　arms　of　Chang　Wen.　She　clutched　him　tight.　He　would　protect　her.

“So　frightened？"　he　said.　“Why？　There　is　nothing　to　fear.　I　came　in　to　get　out　of　the　rain."　His　face　was　close　to　hers,　smiling.　The　thunder　crashed　again.　She　started　and　buried　her　face　in　his　shoulder.　His　arms　were　around　her.　She　was　aware　that　he　was　moving,　half　carrying　her.　She　stopped　involuntarily.　Another　crash　of　thunder　seemed　to　knock　her　legs　from　under　her.　She　clung　closer.　She　was　aware　that　she　was　not　standing　any　more.　She　was　lying　on　the　bed,　and　Chang　was　close　to　her,　pressing　his　strong　body　the　whole　length　of　hers.

She　closed　her　eyes,　and　that　wise　part　of　her　stopped　to　think.　She　was　alone！　It　was　raining　hard.　No　one　would　come;　and　she　was　lying　on　the　bed　with　Chang　Wen.　Was　it　right？　But　the　eyes　of　her　conscience　shut　tight.　Perhaps　he　could　kiss　her　like　a　man　on　the　screen,　kiss　her　as　poor　Li　Yuan　never　did.　The　pulse　inside　her　began　to　beat　rapidly.

She　opened　her　eyes.　He　was　magnificent,　this　man.　At　close　view　his　face　was　not　as　clear　and　smooth　as　she　had　thought.　There　were　three　little　moles　on　the　side　of　his　nose,　and　a　small　red　scar　on　the　bridge.　She　had　never　noticed　that.　Who　had　hurt　him？　She　wanted　to　touch　his　face.

The　lightning　flashed　outside.　Lotus　Charm　ducked,　and　pressed　her　face　against　his　chest,　like　a　frightened　kitten.　She　realized　then　that　his　hand　was　inside　her　robe.　She　wanted　to　move　it,　but　not　until　the　lightning　and　thunder　were　over.　She　waited.　The　thunder　came　rolling　into　the　stifling　room.　She　must　move.　But　why？　This　was　love.　But　it　wasn't　...　or　was　it？　She　tried　to　shift　her　legs,　but　they　were　like　jelly　—　and　the　possessive,　demanding　hand　moved　in.　Was　this　...　was　she　being　like　Jeweled　Lute？

Her　heart　began　to　thump　wildly.　The　hand　had　moved　again,　and　she　was　aware　of　a　great　warmth　somewhere　about　her.　She　felt　lethargic　now.

But　she　must　struggle.　This　was　not　right.　She　would　get　off　the　bed　and　laugh　at　him.　She　opened　her　eyes.　Chang　Wen's　face　was　red.　There　was　a　strange　commanding　look　in　his　eyes.　Against　her　own　throbbing　body,　she　could　feel　a　muscle　of　his　jumping.　She　tried　to　move,　but　his　arms　were　too　strong.　She　pushed　her　small　fist　into　his　mouth,　wrenched　herself　free,　and　sprang　off　the　bed.　There,　she　was　safe.　Run,　run　like　the　wind.　But　the　thunder　...　She　stood　still,　breathing　unevenly,　her　hands　clasped,　a　terrible　sinking　feeling　in　her　stomach.

His　arms　went　around　her.　He　turned　up　her　face　to　his,　and　smiling,　he　kissed　her.　She　tilted　her　head　back　to　avoid　him,　but　their　lips　were　still　joined,　his　hot　and　hard　against　hers.　She　opened　her　eyes;　then　closed　them　quickly　as　outside　the　lightning　flamed.　Terrified,　she　subsided　into　a　limp,　pulsating　stupor.

He　put　her　on　the　bed.　Relaxed　and　comforted　she　looked　at　him.　His　head　went　down　suddenly,　and　his　lips　touched　her　breasts,　kindling　the　fire　in　her　anew.　She　was　aware　of　his　furious　breathing,　the　quick　physical　upsurge　of　his　body　crashing　into　hers,　and　a　sweet　sense　of　triumph.　There　was　thunder　outside,　but　she　did　not　heed　it　any　more.　The　thunder　was　inside　her　now,　roaring　and　demanding,　burning　her　with　a　transcendent　fire.　Love　...　this　was　love　...　And　suddenly　he　was　stilled-limp.　His　head　on　her　bosom.　She　could　hear　his　heart　beating,　and　hers.　And　some　unknown　and　nameless　part　of　her　was　opening　and　closing.

He　made　a　movement　to　get　up.　No,　no,　he　must　not　go.　Sudden　panic　filled　her　heart.　She　found　his　lips　and　kissed　him.　And　he　was　there　again,　close　to　her,　the　storm　of　his　love　rising　in　swift　violence　until　she　was　near　to　fainting.

Then　a　great　quiet,　a　languorous　swooning　peace.　She　was　lost.　Even　memory　had　gone.　But　she　was　gloriously　relaxed,　and　wise　with　the　wisdom　of　the　ages.　Calm,　as　she　had　never　been　calm.

When　he　drew　away　this　time,　she　could　not　protest.　She　lay　where　he　left　her,　a　tearful　smile　on　her　face.　“I've　got　to　go　now,"　he　said.　He　ran　his　hand　over　his　smooth　hair.　“See　you　tomorrow　—　perhaps."

The　word　“perhaps"　stung　her　like　a　slap　in　the　eye.　Perhaps　…　What　did　he　mean？　She　sat　up　and　tried　to　think,　but　her　mind　was　wandering.　He　had　gone.　No　lover's　parting,　barely　a　word.　Some　part　of　her　was　remembering.　She　had　taken　something　of　his　...　something　Jeweled　Lute　had　told　her　...　Suppose　...　She　walked　to　the　window,　and　stood　looking　out　across　the　city.

The　sky　was　clear.　The　roofs　looked　newly　washed.　There　was　peace　everywhere.　And　she　was　at　peace　too.　Languorously　she　stretched.　She　looked　at　herself　in　the　mirror.　She　touched　the　breast　he　had　kissed,　as　if　the　fire　were　still　there.　Then　she　made　herself　up,　dressed,　and　went　down　to　the　theater　to　sing.

The　song　over,　she　went　back　to　her　room.　She　locked　the　door　behind　her,　and　sat　on　the　bed.　Presently　the　tears　came.　For　an　hour　she　wept,　and　the　pain　of　the　tears　was　like　the　pain　of　love.　When　she　could　cry　no　more　she　crept　into　bed　and　began　to　think.

She　had　lost　everything.　She　had　changed.　Of　that,　she　was　sure.　And　she　wanted　to　weep　again,　for　irrevocable　harm　had　been　done　her　body,　which　she　had　been　taught　to　respect.　Doubt　stirred　in　her　mind.　Unable　to　bear　it,　she　clambered　out　of　bed,　switched　on　the　light　and　looked　at　herself　in　the　mirror.

Where　was　the　change？　Had　this　slim　face　been　altered？　Changed　so　that　everyone　would　notice　and　nudge　each　other,　and　say　“Look　at　her.　She's　been　done."　But　what　was　different？　There　were　love　bruises　under　her　eyes,　that　was　all.

Much　later,　lying　on　the　bed,　she　cupped　her　breasts　in　her　hands　and　whispered　into　the　darkness,　“Lotus　Charm,　you　have　found　your　lover.　You　are　alive　at　last.　You　are　not　Phoenix　Girl　who　has　to　marry　whomever　she　is　told;　you　have　chosen,　because　you　were　chosen.　You　are　not　Jeweled　Lute　who　must　sleep　with　any　man　who　will　hire　her.　You　love　only　one　and　you　have　given　him　all,　and　you　will　always　do　that.　You　knew　what　you　wanted,　and　you　took　it."

The　face　of　her　lover　appeared　in　the　darkness　of　her　room.　“darling,"　she　whispered,　“darling,　come　to　me　again."　But　there　was　only　emptiness.　Only　the　memory　of　love　was　real.　This　was　her　man.　He　could　beat　her,　scold　her,　starve　her　,　but　it　would　be　wonderful　always.　She　slapped　her　face　in　the　dark.　Chang　Wen　was　beating　her.　Any　pain　he　could　give　her,　was　better　than　anything　from　anyone　else.

But　in　the　next　moment　she　had　decided　that　she　would　not　give　herself　to　him　again.　Never.　That　would　be　cheap.　She　knew　what　love　was　not,　and　she　would　be　careful.　Jeweled　Lute　had　told　her　that　girls　got　into　trouble.　She　would　have　to　be　careful.

The　foggy　season　came.　Phoenix　Girl's　baby　boy　was　two　months　old.　He　was　fat　and　round　and　smiling.　Phoenix　Girl　was　quietly　happy,　Pao　Ching　and　Mrs.　Fang　were　overjoyed.　A　grandson　was　good　news.　Even　Little　Liu　was　impressed.　He　had　given　up　smoking　opium　and　was　devoting　himself　to　his　music　and　to　being　a　good　husband.

Mrs.　Fang　drank　only　at　night.　She　was　afraid　that　if　she　got　drunk　in　the　daytime　she　might　drop　the　baby.　To　everyone　but　Lotus　Charm　she　was　sweet　and　charming.　To　Lotus　Charm　she　never　spoke,　but　her　little　cold　eyes　seemed　to　say,　“Get　out　of　my　house.　I　have　a　grandson　now,　part　of　my　own　flesh　and　blood,　while　you　are　a　bastard.　Who　cares　for　you？"

Li　Yuan　was　leaving　for　service　in　Burma.　The　day　he　left　Pao　Ching　told　Chang　Wen　he　was　not　needed　any　more.　Chang　Wen　smiled　and　asked　for　severance　pay,　which　Pao　Ching　paid.　Then　he　smiled　goodbye　to　Lotus　Charm　and　left.　Pao　Ching　looked　at　his　daughter　curiously.　She　had　got　thinner　these　days.　Perhaps　it　was　the　heat.　He　had　never　seen　her　so　thin,　he　thought,　but　then　she　was　growing　up.　She　was　fully　developed　now.　Her　cheeks　were　sunken,　making　her　face　doubly　attractive,　but　she　was　too　thin.　Perhaps　she　loved　Li　Yuan　after　all.

“Come,　Lotus,"　he　said,　taking　her　hand,　“let's　go　and　see　your　sister's　baby.　Everything　Little　King　does　is　amusing."

“Not　today,"　said　Lotus　Charm　dimly,　“I'll　go　tomorrow."　She　went　into　the　bedroom.　She　had　a　baby　inside　her　—　Chang　Wen's　baby.　It　was　almost　two　months　old　now,　a　tiny　little　lump　in　her　belly.

Her　father　came　in.　“You　know,　Lotus　Charm,"　he　said　with　a　little　laugh,　“you　are　the　last　of　my　responsibilities.　Do　you　want　to　marry？　If　so,　I　must　find　a　good_looking,　honest,　hard_working　man　to　marry　my　little　Lotus　Charm."

Lotus　Charm　did　not　answer.

“Please,　daughter,　give　me　your　opinion."

“I　am　young　yet,"　she　volunteered　dimly.　“There　is　no　hurry."

“All　right.　Then　we'll　discuss　it　another　day,　but　let　me　know　how　you　feel.　I　want　to　do　only　the　best　by　you.　Now　let's　go　and　see　my　grandson."

Lotus　Charm　shook　her　head.　After　her　father　had　gone　she　lay　on　the　bed.　Her　baby　was　Chang　Wen's.　Chang　could　not　marry　her,　he　said,　because　he　was　in　government　service.　Chang　meant　everything　to　her.　She　had　intended　never　to　let　him　come　near　her　again,　but　it　happened　every　time　they　met.　Every　time　she　saw　him　she　became　a　Jeweled　Lute.　She　had　done　things　with　him　that　shamed　even　her　private　thoughts.　She　held　her　stomach.　Her　baby　would　be　a　living　witness　to　her　sin.　When　he　was　born　he　would　tell　the　world　that　his　mother　was　cheap　and　sinful.　The　son　of　a　drum　singer,　a　poor　fatherless　child.





