Third　Act


Time:　Two　days　later.

Place:　Mr.　Sung's　study.

Characters:　Wang　Ta-cheng,　Mrs.　Wang,　Wang　Shih-mei,　Sung　Ming-liang,　Ch'en　Hsiang-wu,　Ting　Te-sheng,　Li　Chan-yuan,　Little　K'an,　Fourth　Dog.

Stage　setting:　When　the　curtain　is　up　a　very　old　and　spacious　room　which　is　Mr.　Sung's　study　as　well　as　his　living　room　and　a　reception　room.　Everything　in　the　room　is　old　but　they　are　so　harmoniously　arranged　that　it　gives　an　atmosphere　refined　and　in　good　taste.　Only　a　family　of　scholars　for　many　generations　can　achieve　this　atmosphere.

At　the　back　of　the　stage　there　are　large　windows　which　are　carved　with　good　taste　although　some　of　the　carving　has　fallen　off.　The　windows　have　white　paper　which　is　weather-beaten　and　has　spots　giving　an　appearance　of　pictures.　There　are　two　large　glass　panes　in　the　middle　of　the　row　of　windows.　The　curtains,　held　by　strings,　originally　white　have　now　become　yellowish.　Through　the　panes　one　sees　a　short　pine　tree　and　an　apricot　tree　without　any　leaves　in　the　courtyard.

On　the　left　of　the　stage　a　door　leading　to　the　courtyard　and　in　the　right　corner　there　is　another　door　with　a　blue　cloth　curtain　leading　to　another　room.

In　front　of　the　right　wall　there　are　two　very　old　and　heavy　bookshelves　where　there　are　many　many　books.　Most　of　them　are　old　type　Chinese　books　and　a　few　modern　ones.　In　front　of　the　bookshelves　there　are　a　couple　of　vases　and　one　incense　burner.　The　bookshelves　originally　black,　have　become　yellow　with　age.

Right　in　front　of　the　shelves　there　is　a　broad　wooden　arm-chair　where　there　lies　a　blue　cushion　and　in　the　middle　of　it　there　is　a　red　applique　centerpiece　of　rough　woolen　material.　Both　the　cushion　and　the　centerpiece　are　faded.

On　the　opposite　side　of　the　wall　there　hangs　a　pair　of　scrolls.　The　paper　is　already　yellow　but　the　characters　are　still　quite　clear.　The　characters　are　so　beautiful　that　it　is　evident　that　they　have　been　written　by　a　good　scholar.　One　of　the　scrolls　says　“The　happiest　thing　is　to　read　books"　and　the　other　“You　may　just　as　well　stay　here　a　while".　Between　the　two　scrolls　there　is　another　one　representing　a　typical　Chinese　scenery.　This　picture　is　so　old　that　one　cannot　distinguish　any　color　any　more.

In　front　of　the　three　scrolls　there　stands　a　high　square　occasional　table　and　a　chair　on　each　side　of　it.　All　three　pieces　are　made　of　red　wood.　The　style　of　the　three　pieces　is　out　of　fashion　but　they　are　very　beautiful　nevertheless.

In　the　middle　of　the　room　there　is　a　large　square　table　on　which　there　are　books,　inkstands,　brushes　and　a　tea　service.　There　is　also　a　vase　with　a　branch　of　laurel　like.

On　the　sides　of　the　table　there　are　two　huge　and　most　uncomfortable　chairs.　They　have　blue　cushions　on　them.

When　the　curtain　rises,　Sung　Ming-liang　is　writing　something.　It　looks　like　a　very　important　letter　or　something　because　he　is　so　concentrated.

WSM:　（at　first　looks　through　the　glass　window,　then　comes　to　the　door　and　knocks　at　it）　Mr.　Sung.

SML:　（recognised　her　voice　and　seems　pleased　and　annoyed　at　the　same　time）　Come　in,　please.　（still　writing）

WSM:　（came　in　very　quietly,　first　looked　at　Mr.　Sung　and　then　looked　over　the　room）　Oh！　How　beautiful　it　is　here.　This　is　entirely　different　from　our　place　which　has　nothing　but　swords　and　spears.　（comes　over　to　him,　looks　at　him　writing）　You　write　very　well,　indeed.

SML:　（quickly　finished　the　letter　and　reads　it　over　and　asks　her）　Do　you　write　too,　Miss　Wang？

WSM:　（smiled）　Me？　When　I　hold　the　brush　it　will　break.

SML:　（puts　the　letter　into　his　pocket）　Please　be　seated.　Is　there　anything　you　wish？

WSM:　（became　serious）　Mr.　Sung,　I　have　asked　Li　Chan-yuan.　（sits　down）

SML:　I　knew　that　you　have　quarrelled.

WSM:　（smiled　again）　He　is　a　stupid　fellow,　whenever　I　give　him　two　good　words,　he　would　tell　me　anything.　I　know　that　now　he　has　a　job　that　pays　well　and　he　can　buy　presents　to　please　me.　But　I　don't　care　about　him　and　his　presents.　But　whatever　he　brings　to　me,　I　will　take　it　in　order　to　make　him　tell　me　the　truth.

SML:　What　did　he　say？

WSM:　He　said　that,　（stands　up　to　gain　confidence）　will　you　believe　me？

SML:　（smiled　too）　It　depends　what　you　will　tell　me.　If　it　is　something　serious　naturally　I　will　believe　you.　If　you'll　tell　me　nonsense,　I　won't.

WSM:　No,　this　is　no　nonsense.　It　is　quite　serious.　He　already　knows　that　you　have　cut　off　your　pigtail.　He　knows　that　you　belong　to　the　rebels　and　he　wants　to　arrest　you　in　order　to　get　a　promotion.　I　have　nothing　against　his　wanting　to　get　a　promotion　and　get　better　paid　but　it　just　is　not　the　way　to　get　a　promotion　and　a　raise　by　arresting　you.　Mr.　Sung,　I　have　been　thinking　the　whole　night,　and　I　would　advise　you　to　go　into　hiding.　You　know　a　wise　man　will　never　take　any　risks.

SML:　Have　you　also　told　this　to　your　father？

WSM:　No,　not　yet.　If　my　father　knows　about　it,　he　would　break　Li's　neck,　so　I　want　to　tell　it　to　you　first.　If　you　want　to　go　away　I　will　go　with　you　to　protect　you.　I　am　brave,　I　know　boxing,　I　can　disguise　as　a　boy.　If　I　go　with　you　nobody　will　dare　to　take　advantage　of　you.　（rubs　her　hands）

SML:　Miss　Wang,　I　thank　you　very　much,　but　you　don't　understand　what　I　am　doing.　Whether　I　will　go　into　hiding　I　cannot　decide　right　this　moment.　Even　if　I　would　hide　I　cannot　take　you　with　me.

WSM:　（getting　annoyed）　Why？　Why？　Is　it　because　I　do　not　know　how　to　do　boxing,　or　because　I　have　no　courage,　or　...

SML:　Don't　shout　please.

WSM:　（still　bad　tempered　but　somehow　she　smiled）　Oh,　we　boxers　don't　know　how　to　speak　in　a　low　voice.　Now　I　know　I　am　not　refined,　don't　know　how　to　write　but　am　I　not　...

SML:　Miss　Wang,　please　go　home.　（sorrowfully）　I　don't　know　how　to　make　this　whole　thing　clear　to　you.

WSM:　I　really　want　to　help　you　and　I　don't　...

SML:　To　be　frank　with　you　I　don't　know　boxing　but　I　have　my　revolver.

WSM:　（out　of　curiosity）　Where？　Where？

SML:　（could　not　do　anything　but　point　to　the　inner　room）　Well　I　have　one　here　（points　to　his　pocket）　and　one　in　the　other　room.

WSM:　（disappointed）　Oh,　so　you　don't　think　highly　of　boxing.　You　really　look　down　on　boxers,　but　it　is　strange　that　you　should　be　such　good　friends　with　my　father.

SML:　Miss　Wang,　you　don't　understand.　There　are　many　many　things　you　don't　understand.　Human　mind　is　like　a　sea,　there　are　so　many　many　things　in　it.　You　don't　understand　because　you　are　still　so　young.

WSM:　（very　very　disappointed）　Well,　I　must　be　going　because　you　look　down　upon　me.

SML:　（very　kindly）　No,　I　don't　look　down　upon　you,　I　simply　have　so　many　things　to　do.

Mrs.W:　（in　the　courtyard）　Mr.　Sung.

WSM:　Darn　it！　Mother　is　here！　（wants　to　hide　herself）

SML:　Take　hold　of　yourself！　（walks　to　the　door）　Mrs.　Wang,　you　came　just　at　the　right　time.　Please　take　your　daughter　with　you.　She　is　just　as　naughty　as　a　little　child.

Mrs.W:　（comes　in　and　stares　at　her　daughter　at　a　loss　for　words　from　anger）

WSM:　（really　wanted　to　make　a　scene　but　controls　herself,　turns　towards　the　bookshelf　and　looks　at　a　flowered　vase）

Mrs.W:　（without　waiting　for　Mr.　Sung　to　ask　her　to　sit　down,　does　so）　Mr.　Sung,　her　father　has　always　looked　on　you　as　a　good　friend.　Why　do　you　do　this？

SML:　Do　what？

Mrs.W:　She！　Niu-niu！

SML:　Mrs.　Wang,　she　is　a　good　girl.

Mrs.W:　You　must　not　talk　like　that.　You　are　an　educated　man,　you　can　read　and　know　the　code　of　behavior.

WSM:　（turns　around　to　talk　the　blame　on　herself）　I　myself　wanted　to　come.　It　has　nothing　to　do　with　Mr.　Sung.

SML:　（sighed）

Mrs.W:　（to　her　daughter）　You　still　have　the　audacity　to　speak　to　me.　Go　home　and　be　quick！

WSM:　I　will　go,　only　don't　find　faults　with　this　good　man　and　don't　quarrel　with　him.（very　ashamed　of　herself　yet　she　walks　out　of　the　room　slowly　and　dignified）

Mrs.W:　（her　eyes　following　her　daughter）　Mr.　Sung,　you　are　a　man　of　understanding,　and　won't　consider　me　rude,　but　I　just　want　to　talk　to　you　and　straighten　things　out.

SML:　Yes,　that　is　the　best　way　to　clear　things　up,　Mrs.　Wang.

Mrs.W:　（talks　as　if　her　speech　were　rehearsed）　You　see　in　our　family　both　the　old　and　the　young　are　uneducated,　but　all　of　us　have　been　very　kind　to　each　other.　But　because　of　you,　excuse　me　for　telling　the　truth,　quite　recently　all　the　members　of　my　family　are　at　loggerheads　with　each　other　all　on　your　account.

SML:　I　am　sorry,　I　have　never　thought　of　that.

Mrs.W:　He,　I　mean　my　husband,　has　many　many　pupils　but　he　loves　Te-sheng　and　Chan-yuan　best.　Te-sheng　is　his　first　pupil　and　Chan-yuan　is　a　clever,　good　talker　so　he　always　pleased　his　teacher.　These　two　pupils　are　really　like　his　own　sons,　if　they　don't　come　to　see　us　for　a　single　day,　they　would　feel　uneasy　and　we　would　be　worried.

SML:　Oh,　this　kind　of　a　tie　between　a　teacher　and　a　student　is　rare　nowadays.

Mrs.W:　Yes,　you　are　right.　But　because　of　you　Niu-niu's　father　and　Li　Chan-yuan　have　disagreements.　I　don't　know　what　you　intend　to　do　and　what　you　have　on　your　mind　but　I　know　very　well　that　my　husband　and　Li　Chan-yuan　because　of　you　have　serious　disagreements.　Niu-niu's　father　is　your　good　friend　and　naturally　he　would　take　your　side.　Li　Chan-yuan　on　the　other　hand　is　not　your　friend　and　of　course　he　would　not　take　your　side　as　his　teacher　has　done.　So　this　is　the　source　of　disagreement.　You　see　the　day　before　yesterday,　on　the　day　of　the　Moon　Festival,　Chan-yuan　did　not　come　to　me　because　you　were　with　us.

SML:　I　am　sorry,　Mrs　Wang.　Yes　I　notice　little　of　that.

Mrs.W:　Hm　...　You　say　little　bit,　that's　for　you.　But　as　for　me,　it　nearly　broke　my　heart.　There　was　another　reason　why　Chan-yuan　did　not　come—Niu-niu.　You　see,　Chan-yuan　and　she　played　together,　learned　boxing　together,　ever　since　they　are　small　children.　I　have　noticed　that　Chan-yuan　had　intentions　towards　Niu-niu　but　I　have　never　encouraged　them.　As　a　mother　I　have　nailed　my　eyes　on　my　daughter.　I　must　get　a　man　who　is　able　to　support　her　well.　But　now　Chan-yuan　has　a　job　and　a　good　job　too,　so　I　begin　to　feel　that　if　they　marry　it　would　be　a　good　match,　but　you　make　all　the　trouble　for　them.

SML:　（stopped　her）　I,　Mrs.　Wang？　Probably　I　...

Mrs.W:　Chan-yuan　has　told　me　everything.

SML:　But　Chan-yuan　is　a　ruffian.

Mrs.W:　A　ruffian　has　his　good　points,　an　educated　man　has　his　bad　points.

SML:　Exactly,　Mrs.　Wang.

Mrs.W:　Well,　I　won't　say　that　your　heart　is　bad,　but,　but　...　when　things　happen　like　this,　they　cannot　but　make　trouble.　So　now　we　must　think　of　a　way　out　to　settle　everything　peacefully.

SML:　It　is　not　at　all　easy,　Mrs.　Wang.

TTS:　（rushed　in　a　great　hurry）　Mrs.　Wang,　Mrs.　Wang.　Go　home　at　once.　My　teacher　wanted　to　go　to　Li　Chan-yuan　to　settle　the　account.　Come,　quickly.

Mrs.W:　（stand　up）　Mr.　Sung,　see.　Haven't　I　told　you　so？

SML:　（also　stands　up）　Te-sheng,　tell　your　teacher　to　come　here.　Mrs.　Wang,　your　husband　will　listen　to　me.　There　will　be　no　more　trouble.

Mrs.W:　Mr.　Sung,　whether　there　is　going　to　be　any　more　trouble　or　not,　all　depends　on　you.　（leaves　with　Te-sheng）

SML:　（follows　them　to　the　door）　Te-sheng,　you　must　tell　your　teacher　to　come　here.　（turns　back　and　says　to　himself）　What　a　mess！　What　a　mess！

WSM:　（comes　out　from　the　inner　room,　wearing　man's　clothes　and　Mr.　Sung's　cap,　holding　a　revolver　in　her　hand）　Look！

SML:　（knits　his　brows）　Why　are　you　still　here？

WSM:　（points　to　the　door　which　leads　to　the　courtyard）　I　went　into　the　courtyard　and　came　back　through　there.　Don't　you　think　I　look　like　a　man？　You　told　me　that　fists　are　much　inferior　to　a　revolver,　now　I　have　it　too.　If　you　have　me　to　protect　you　nobody　can　touch　you.

SML:　（wants　to　laugh　but　realizes　the　ridiculousness）　This　is　ridiculous,　your　mother　has　just　given　me　a　scolding.　Have　you　heard　it？

WSM:　Don't　bother　about　my　mother,　I　am　my　father's　daughter.

SML:　（getting　desperate）　Miss　Wang.　I　really　...　but　I　have　something　very　important　to　do.

LCY:　（calling　from　the　courtyard）　Mr.　Sung！

WSM:　（recognises　Li's　voice）　Get　it　out　with　him！

SML:　（grates　his　teeth）　No.　（motions　to　her　to　go　into　the　inner　room）

WSM:　（hesitates　a　second　and　goes　into　the　inner　room）

SML:　（comes　to　the　door）　Come　in！

LCY:　（very　disturbed,　but　tries　to　calm　himself,　coming　in,　looks　all　around　the　room）

SML:　（did　not　ask　Li　to　sit　down）　What　do　you　want　Chan-yuan？

LCY:　（came　over　to　Mr.　Sung）　Mr.　Sung,　now　we　face　each　other　as　a　man　to　man.　We　must　straighten　things　out.

SML:　Speak　up,　quickly,　I　am　busy.

LCY:　You　probably　know　what　I　do.

SML:　Oh　yes,　I　know.　You　are　a　running　dog.

LCY:　What？　（grasps　Mr.　Sung's　arm）

SML:　Take　your　hand　off！　（Li　is　forced　to　take　the　hand　off　because　of　Sung's　dignity）　I　tell　you,　you　are　a　running　dog.　You　learned　a　lot　of　boxing　from　your　teacher　but　you　did　not　learn　his　good　character　and　sense　of　justice.　You　really　are　a　disgrace　to　your　teacher.

LCY:　Don't　waste　words.　Yes　my　teacher　has　the　sense　of　justice　but　every　day　he　goes　to　the　fair　and　is　tired　out　like　a　dog　and　yet　he　cannot　get　enough　money　to　fill　his　stomach,　I,　a　running　dog,　see　what　I　wear　and　I　can　fill　up　my　insides.　I　tell　you,　your　life　is　in　my　hand.　When　I'll　arrest　you,　I'll　get　one　hundred　taels　of　silver,　beautiful　shiny　white　silver！

SML:　Oh,　don't　imagine　I　am　as　easy　to　arrest　as　you　imagine.　I　tell　you,　I　am　not　a　bit　afraid　of　death,　so　don't　frighten　me　with　death.　（changes　his　tone　and　becomes　friendly）　But,　for　the　sake　of　your　teacher　I　will　not　have　any　trouble　with　you.　（walks　to　Li　and　shakes　his　hand）　How　much　do　you　want,　say　it？

LCY:　How　much？　Well　there　is　a　hundred　taels　of　silver　waiting　for　me,　why　should　I　ask　you　for　any　money？

SML:　No,　don't　speak　to　me　like　this—after　all　you　are　a　pupil　of　Master　Wang,　so　at　least　you　know　something　about　the　boxers　code　of　honor.　I　will　get　some　money　together　and　I　think　I　can　manage　to　collect　one　hundred　taels　too.　You　see,　silver　is　all　the　same—beautiful,　white　and　shiny.　I　think　you　had　better　take　my　silver　and　then　shut　your　mouth　and　don't　interfere　with　me　any　longer.

LCY:　Well,　if　you　have　the　silver　I　will　take　you　as　my　friend.

SML:　（sarcastically）　Yes,　that　is　the　code　of　honor.

LCY:　We　are　friends　now,　I　want　you　to　do　something　for　me.　Please　go　and　ask　my　teacher　to　give　Shih-mei　to　me.　She　and　I　are　brother　and　sister　and　we　are　both　boxers,　so　we　are　really　made　for　each　other.　Mrs.　Wang　is　also　willing　because　now　I　have　my　job,　can　make　a　very　good　living.　The　trouble　lies　with　my　teacher　only　because　he　may　object　and　Shih-mei　may　not　be　willing　just　on　your　account.　If　you　go　and　tell　my　teacher　about　this,　he　will　listen　to　you.　If　he　agrees,　then　Shih-mei　will　come　around　too.　So　you　will　be　the　matchmaker　for　me　and　I　will　not　interfere　with　you　and　our　bargain　is　about　equal.　And　this　matchmaking　is　more　important　than　silver　to　me.　If　you　will　do　this　we　will　be　on　the　best　of　terms.　If　you　don't,　you　know　how　powerful　I　am.

SML:　No.　I　cannot　do　this.

WSM:　（still　wearing　Mr.　Sung's　clothes,　holding　the　revolver　but　hatless,　comes　out　of　the　inner　room）　Chan-yuan,　you　get　out　of　here.　I　would　rather　marry　a　dog　than　you.　If　you　had　not　been　my　brother,　I　would　shoot　you　without　any　hesitation.　Get　out！

LCY:　Alright！　You,　both　of　you,　wait　for　me　here.　I　have　guns　and　helpers　quite　near　here.　（runs　away）

SML:　Miss　Wang,　now　you　spoiled　everything　again.　I　tried　to　be　nice　to　him　because　I　needed　time　to　do　many　things　here,　now　everything　is　finished.　Why　do　you　act　like　this？　Oh,　I　cannot　blame　you,　I　myself　should　be　blamed.

WSM:　（her　hands　trembling）　I　...　I　...　blame　me,　you　have　done　nothing　wrong.

SML:　Never　mind　whose　fault　it　is,　change　your　clothes,　be　quick　and　ask　Master　Ch'en　to　come　here　and　then　take　this.　（gives　her　the　letter）　Hurry　to　Hu　Kuo　Temple　where　you　will　find　a　small　black　door.　You　knock　only　twice,　if　you　get　no　answer,　knock　twice　again.　If　someone　answers　you,　you　just　say　“pigtail".　Do　you　understand？　（wrote　a　few　words　on　the　letter）

WSM:　（puts　the　revolver　on　the　table,　quickly　takes　off　Mr.　Sung's　clothes）　I　understand,　I　understand,　I　will　run　there　as　an　arrow.　（takes　up　the　letter　and　runs　away）

SML:　（looked　at　her　back　for　a　while,　picks　up　the　revolver　from　the　table　and　puts　in　his　pocket.　Took　a　lot　of　documents　from　behind　the　books　and　burned　them,　went　round　the　room　to　see　what　should　be　destroyed　and　what　he　should　take　with　him.　Then　stood　still　facing　the　scrolls）

CHW:　（rushes　in）　Mr.　Sung,　you　want　to　see　me？

SML:　（went　over　to　Ch'en　and　shakes　his　hand）　Master　Ch'en,　when　you　arrest　somebody　do　you　issue　the　warrant？　You　are　the　instructor！

CHW:　I　only　teach　them　boxing,　I　don't　care　about　anything　else.

SML:　So　if　they　want　to　arrest　me,　you　cannot　stop　them.

CHW:　No　I　have　no　way　of　knowing　anything.　Why？　Do　they　want　to　arrest　you？

SML:　Yes.

CHW:　Why　don't　you　go　into　hiding？　I　will　go　with　you.　You　are　Master　Wang's　friend　and　Master　Wang　is　half　my　friend,　half　my　teacher.　If　I　protect　you　I　will　lose　my　job,　but　I　don't　care.　If　you　don't　want　to　go　away,　I'll　be　here　to　protect　you.

SML:　Yes,　now　I　should　go　into　hiding.　I　know　where　to　go.　You　needn't　come　with　me.

CHW:　If　you　don't　like　to　take　me　along,　I　will　be　here　to　take　care　of　your　house.

SML:　Good！　Please　tell　Master　Wang　I　will　see　him　later.　（walks　towards　the　door）

WTC:　（already　in　the　courtyard）　Mr.　Sung,　where　are　you　going？

SML:　（stops）　Now　things　are　getting　serious,　they　are　quite　near　here,　I　want　to　go　elsewhere　to　hide.

WTC:　（came　into　the　room）　Is　it　because　of　Li　Chan-yuan？

SML:　Yes.　He　and　I　quarrelled.

WTC:　If　that　is　the　case,　I　will　not　allow　you　to　go.　I　cannot　see　you　going　away　because　my　pupil　forced　you　to　go.　I　will　stay　here　and　I　will　give　him　a　lesson　in　front　of　your　eyes　Master　Ch'en　is　it　not　right？

CHW:　（squats　again）　You　are　right.　He　is　your　pupil.

SML:　（very　seriously）　No,　no,　that's　not　right.　I　am　going　away　not　simply　of　Li　Chan-yuan.　If　he　does　not　arrest　me　today,　sooner　or　later　someone　else　will　arrest　me.　The　reason　for　my　hiding　is　not　that　I　am　afraid　of　anyone,　but　there　are　other　more　important　reasons.　My　work　does　not　allow　me　to　be　sentimental　and　rash,　when　the　time　comes　that　I　should　fight,　I　fight.　If　I　must　go　into　hiding,　I　go.

WTC:　If　that　is　the　case,　Master　Ch'en　you　go　with　Mr.　Sung.　I　will　stay　here　to　wait　for　Chan-yuan.

SML:　It　is　really　not　necessary.

WTC:　Why？　He　is　my　pupil,　if　the　dares　to　hurt　you　and　I　stand　by　without　giving　him　a　good　lesson,　I　would　be　the　laughing　stock　for　all　the　people.

SML:　My　business　is　much　much　more　important　than　any　personal　relationships.

WTC:　What　is　the　important　work　you　do？　If　you　don't　tell　me,　how　can　I　understand！

SML:　I　cannot　explain　it　to　you　in　few　words　and　you　cannot　understand　it　in　a　day.　One　of　these　days　you　will　understand　it　without　my　telling　you　anything.　When　that　time　comes,　you　and　I　will　be　hand　in　hand　fighting　for　it　together.　I　tell　you　the　truth,　ever　since　I　have　known　you　I　have　told　you　many　many　times　that　you　are　a　very　useful　person.　Now　you　must　control　your　temper,　when　the　opportunity　comes　I'll　ask　you　to　help　me　to　do　the　important　work.

WTC:　（silent　for　a　while）　Well,　go！　Whatever　you　tell　me,　I　only　obey.

SML:　（again　wanted　to　go　out　and　Master　Ch'en　stood　up　wishing　to　accompany　him）　Master　Ch'en,　don't　come　with　me.　（feels　his　revolver）　Master　Wang　there　is　another　revolver　in　that　room　in　a　box,　you　take　it.

CHW:　Mr.　Sung,　Master　Wang　and　I　have　fists.　Revolvers　are　useless　to　us.

SML:　Master　Wang,　go　to　take　it.　If　they　come　to　search　this　house　and　discover　it,　it　will　only　add　to　my　list　of　crimes.

WTC:　Good！　I　will　keep　it　for　you.　（goes　into　the　inner　room）

SML:　（just　reached　the　door　but　came　back　again）　They　are　here　already！

CHW:　（one　jump　and　he　was　in　front　of　the　door）　Who？

LCY:　（came　in　with　Little　K'an　and　Fourth　Dog）　Don't　move,　all　of　you！　（blocks　the　door　to　Sung　and　Little　K'an　and　Fourth　Dog　stand　in　front　of　the　inner　door）

CHW:　（to　protect　Mr.　Sung　stands　before　him）　What　is　this　all　about！

LCY:　To　arrest　someone！　（puts　his　hand　in　his　belt　feeling　for　the　gun）

CHW:　Who　is　the　someone！

LCY:　（nods　to　Mr.　Sung）　He！

CHW:　I　am　the　chief　instructor,　I　do　not　allow　you　to　arrest　him.

LK:　（in　uniform,　holding　a　revolver）　you　are　joking,　you　are　the　chief　instructor,　yet　you　don't　allow　us　to　arrest　people.　Who　is　employing　you？

CHW:　I　will　give　up　my　job　but　I　won't　allow　you　to　arrest　a　good　man.

LCY:　Good　man.　（quickly　knocks　off　Mr.Sung's　cap）　Master　Ch'en,　look！

CHW:　What！　Mr.　Sung　you　really　are　a　...

SML:　（smiled）　Master　Ch'en,　you　are　surprised,　eh？

CHW:　（became　very　friendly　with　them）　Chan-yuan,　little　K'an,　Fourth　Dog　we　got　the　job　simply　because　we　want　something　to　eat,　why　should　we　be　so　serious　as　to　arrest　and　put　people　to　death？　Don't　arrest　him,　if　there　is　any　blame　I'll　take　it.

LK:　Oh,　you　take　the　whole　thing　very　lightly,　will　you　give　us　one　hundred　taels　of　silver？

CHW:　Yes,　take　it　easy,　I'll　pay　you　gradually.

FD:　I　think　that's　a　good　idea.

LK:　Shut　up！　If　we　don't　arrest　anybody,　how　can　we　get　promoted？　He　is　already　the　chief　instructor,　of　course　he　does　not　care！

LCY:　Yes,　you　are　the　chief　instructor,　you　are　quite　pleased　with　yourself,　we　young　people　have　to　arrest　people　in　order　to　get　a　promotion.　Get　away！

CHW:　Li　Chan-yuan,　you　are　Master　Wang's　pupil　and　Mr.　Sung　is　Master　Wang's　friend.　Why　are　you　so　ruthless　to　him？

SML:　Master　Ch'en,　don't　interfere,　I　will　go　with　them.

CHW:　No！　If　I　had　known　that　we　are　really　for　doing　this　type　of　work,　I　would　not　have　taken　the　job.

LCY:　（getting　angry）　Will　you　get　out　of　the　way,　or　not？　（pushed　Master　Ch'en）

CHW:　（getting　angry　also）　What？　You　dare　to　touch　me？

LCY:　Master　Ch'en,　I　know　you　box　well,　I　cannot　fight　you,　but　let　me　tell　you　that　all　of　us　have　revolvers.

CHW:　（looked　at　each　one　of　them）　Well,　I　was　never　afraid　of　revolvers.

LK:　Ch'en！　Will　you　get　out　of　the　way　or　not？　If　you　will　make　me　angry,　I　don't　care　whether　you　are　the　instructor　or　not！

CHW:　（walked　towards　LK）　What　will　you　do　then？

LK:　You　fool！　（he　fired）　Now　let　us　see　whether　you　are　afraid　of　a　revolver　or　not！

CHW:　Ah！　（stumbled　and　fell　down）

LCY　&　FD:　Little　K'an！　You！

LK:　Chan-yuan,　we　have　to　be　ruthless.　When　he　is　killed　you　can　hope　to　be　the　instructor.

LCY:　You　are　right,　Little　K'an.　（to　Mr.　Sung）　Go！

WTC:　（came　from　the　inner　room,　gets　the　revolvers　from　LK　and　FD,　pushed　himself　between　them　and　they　both　fell.　Puts　the　two　revolvers　on　the　table　and　went　to　LCY　rather　slowly）　Chan-yuan,　I　know　you　have　a　revolver　too.　Come　shoot　here.　I　am　your　teacher,　let　me　see　whether　you　dare　to　shoot　me.　（comes　towards　Li　who　retreats）

LCY:　Teacher,　teacher.

WTC:　You　son　of　a　bitch.　You　have　been　my　pupil　for　so　many　years,　yet　now　you　do　this　dirty　work.　You　are　so　shameless　that　you　are　working　together　with　Little　K'an　and　Fourth　Dog,　the　scum　of　the　earth.

LK:　（rises　up　and　wants　to　grab　a　revolver）

SML:　（points　his　revolver）　You,　don't　move！　（Little　K'an　and　FD　both　stood　in　front　of　the　bookshelves）

WTC:　Chan-yuan,　you　will　pay　for　this！

LCY:　Little　K'an　shot　him！

WTC:　You,　shameless　dog.

FD:　Master　Wang,　forgive　us,　we　do　this　just　to　keep　ourselves　fed.

LK:　Fourth　Dog,　pull　yourself　together.

WTC:　（turned　to　LK）　You,　I　should　have　killed　you　eight　years　ago.　（turns　to　Li）　Chan-yuan,　you　brought　Little　K'an　here,　so　you　or　Little　K'an　must　pay　for　Master　Ch'en's　death.

LCY:　（slowly　kneels　down）　Teacher,　we　are　all　young　and　foolish.　（to　Little　K'an）　Little　K'an,　ask　my　teacher　to　forgive　you！

LK:　No,　my　knees　are　not　made　for　kneeling　down.

WTC:　Ah！　（rushes　to　Little　K'an）　I　will　break　your　neck！

LK:　You　think　I　don't　know　anything　about　boxing！　Now　let　me　see　how　capable　you　are！

FD:　Little　K'an,　you　want　to　be　killed！

WTC:　Good！　Come！

LK:　（struck　with　his　fists　Master　Wang's　heart）

WTC:　（at　first　he　showed　no　motion　but　as　soon　as　Little　K'an's　hand　almost　touched　him,　with　his　right　hand　he　grabbed　K'an's　arm　and　with　his　left　struck　Little　K'an's　heart）　Go！

LK:　（did　not　make　any　noise,　just　fell　back　on　his　head　and　knocked　his　head　on　the　shelf　came　forward　again　and　fell）

FD:　（covers　his　face　with　his　hand）　You　want　to　die.

WTC:　（pulls　Little　K'an's　body　to　where　Master　Ch'en's　body　was　and　knelt　down　with　one　knee）　Master　Ch'en,　Brother　Ch'en,　you　are　revenged！　（stands　up　to　Sung）　Mr.　Sung,　no　matter　whether　I　understand　your　work　or　not,　anyhow　I　have　killed　a　man　for　it.　Now　we　are　bound　for　life—like　one　piece　of　string　that　holds　two　grasshoppers—from　now　on,　wherever　you　go,　I　will　go　too.　In　the　past　I　took　care　of　caravans　which　carried　gold,　silver,　and　goods.　From　now　on,　I　will　take　care　of　you.　（to　Fourth　Dog）　You　get　out！　I　won't　kill　you,　you　worthless　thing.

FD:　（quickly　runs　towards　the　door,　then　stops）　Master　Wang,　give　me　my　revolver！　Without　it,　I'll　get　fifty　lashings.

WTC:　（took　up　one　of　the　revolvers,　emptied　the　bullets）　Take　it.

FD:　（took　the　revolver,　trembling）　Master　Wang,　you　really　are　a　Son　of　Han.　（leaves）

WTC:　Chan-yuan,　what　about　you？

LCY:　（still　kneeling　there）　Teacher,　teacher,　do　what　you　like　with　me！　I　am　a　fool.

WTC:　You　get　out　of　here,　too.　I　simply　cannot　kill　you.

SML:　Master　Wang.

WTC:　Well,　let　him　go　back　and　tell　those　chicken　feather　and　garlic　peelings　that　from　now　on,　everyone　who　cuts　off　his　pigtail　is　Wang　Ta-ch'eng's　friend.　If　you　dare　to　arrest　them,　you　will　be　my　enemy.　Chan-yuan,　do　you　hear　me？　You,　or　anyone　of　your　gang,　cross　my　path,　they　can　come.　（pulls　Chan-yuan　who　is　still　kneeling,　by　his　hair　to　the　two　bodies）　You　will　die　the　same　way　the　Little　K'an　died.　（took　off　his　hand　from　Li's　head）　（Li　stands　up,　WTC　pushed　his　shoulder）　Get　out！　Tell　them　my　words！

LCY:　（stumbling　and　rolling　about,　leaves）

WTC:　（to　Sung）　Where　shall　we　go？　Let　us　go.

SML:　Yes,　go.　（Ting　Te-sheng　and　Wang　Shih-mei　came　in　together.　Wang　Shih-mei　perspiring.　TTS　also　excited）

WSM:　（out　of　breath）　Mr.　Sung,　I　sent　the　letter.　They　are　waiting　for　you！

SML:　Good！　（to　WTC）　Now　we　have　a　place　to　go.

TTS:　（looked　at　everything）　Teacher,　what　is　it　all　about？

WTC:　Don't　ask.　Te-sheng,　you　take　care　of　Mrs.　Wang.　I'm　going　away　with　Mr.Sung.

TTS:　I　will　go　with　you.

WTC:　You　take　care　of　Mrs.　Wang.　（to　his　daughter）　Niu-niu,　good-bye！　（takes　Mr.　Sung's　hand　and　Mr.　Sung,　looking　at　Shih-mei,　leave　together）

TTS:　Sister.

WSM:　I　am　going　too.　（follows　them）

（Curtain）







