Chapter　Eighteen


THE　JAPANESE　issued　regulations　for　air　raid　precautions.According　to　the　regulations　the　windows　of　each　house　must　be　covered　with　black　cloth.

There　was　not　a　family　in　the　Little　Sheep　Fold　that　could　afford　to　buy　black　cloth.Sergeant　Pai　and　Fourth　Master　Li　were　in　distress.They　dared　not　ignore　the　executive　order　but　knew　that　people　who　had　no　clothes　to　wear　could　not　buy　black　cloth.

As　soon　as　Sergeant　Pai　saw　Fourth　Master　Li　he　sighed　and　said，“I　had　just　said　that　as　soon　as　people　were　happy　some　trouble　was　sure　to　come.See　—　each　family　must　cover　its　windows　with　black　cloth.”

“Oh　—　that　means　it's　time　for　me　to　be　cursed　again.”

“Ai　—　let's　hold　our　complaints.What　are　we　to　do？That's　more　important.Suppose　they　can't　get　any　black　cloth　what　shall　we　do？”

“Newspapers　painted　black　—　newspapers　painted　black.When　the　Japanese　come　to　inspect　—　well　—　the　people's　windows　are　black.Won't　that　do？”

“There　is　something　in　what　you　say，but　where　can　we　find　paste　even.Republic　flour　will　not　make　paste.”

“I　will　make　a　pail　of　paste　and　give　it　to　the　people　free.In　fact，even　if　I　give　them　the　paste　free，I　will　still　have　to　bear　their　cursing.”

Sergeant　Pai　said　quickly，“I　will　not　let　you　take　all　the　insults　this　time.I　will　go　first　and　tell　the　people　they　must　use　black　cloth.Then　you　go　and　tell　them　they　can　use　newspaper.And　then　if　you　give　them　paste，it　would　be　strange　if　the　people　really　do　not　know　the　difference　between　good　and　bad.”

The　old　man　nodded.

“But　the　matter　is　not　as　simple　as　that.”

“What　else？”　the　old　man　shouted.

Sergeant　Pai　smiled.“We　must　go　to　tell　the　people　that　if　there　is　an　air　raid，each　family　must　put　out　its　lights　and　its　fires，and　all　stay　in　their　rooms.”

“So　they　can　be　killed　by　the　bombs？”

Sergeant　Pai　did　not　answer　the　old　man's　question　but　continued　to　explain　the　orders.“Each　family　must　provide　a　person　to　stand　outside　the　gate，for　during　the　air　raid　no　one　is　allowed　to　close　his　gate.If　the　family　has　no　one　to　stand　guard　they　must　hire　someone.The　official　rate　is　three　dollars　an　hour.”

“What　is　the　meaning　of　all　this？”

“It　would　be　strange　if　I　understood.You　might　say　that　if　the　gates　are　wide　open　the　Japanese　could　very　con-veniently　go　in　and　arrest　anyone　they　chose.”

“You're　right.This　is　not　for　air　raid　precautions　but　con-venience　in　arresting　people.”

Sergeant　Pai　went　to　the　families　to　tell　them　about　the　air　raid　matters.

The　neighbors　grumbled　at　Sergeant　Pai's　notice，but　all　also　realized，　“It　would　look　from　this　as　though　Japan　had　really　been　bombed，”　and　were　happy.

Fouth　Master　Li　went　first　to　see　Cheng　Chang　Shun　and　asked　him　for　old　newspapers.

Cheng　Chang　Shun　told　Fourth　Master　that　he　had　old　newspapers　and　also　old　rags.He　asked　the　old　man　to　take　whatever　newspapers　he　needed.“Old　Sir，take　an　armful—better　than　having　them　all　come　here　one　by　one.I　am　a　businessman，it　would　not　do　for　them　to　know　that　I　gave　these　newspapers　for　nothing.Am　I　not　right？”

“Right.”　Fourth　Master　nodded.

“As　for　the　rags　—　if　there　are　any　who　want　them　—　I　will　sell　at　the　buying　price，but　I　can't　give　them　away.”

Old　Man　Li　carried　away　a　great　pile　of　newspapers，he　made　a　pail　of　flour　paste，and　went　to　the　neighbors.The　neighbors　were　all　grateful　to　him，and　even　John　Ting　accepted　what　the　old　man　brought.

Yun　Mei　—　alone　of　the　neighbors　—　did　not　accept　the　old　man's　paper　and　paste.　She　had　already　thought　of　using　old　paper　and　had　pasted　up　the　windows.　She　had　also　rubbed　up　a　mess　of　ink　and　blackened　the　paper.

It　was　about　ten　o'clock　at　night　when　the　first　practice　alarm　sounded.Most　of　the　people　in　the　Little　Sheep　Fold　had　gone　to　bed.

The　grown　people　could　not　find　their　clothes　or　they　put　on　the　wrong　shoes.The　children　waking　from　their　dreams　cried　aloud.Not　understanding，hugging，pulling，and　carrying　their　children，they　all　rushed　into　the　courtyards.They　then　remembered　the　instructions　Sergeant　Pai　had　given　them　a　few　days　ago：“During　an　air　raid，put　out　the　lights　and　sit　in　your　rooms.”

Looking　at　the　courtyards，looking　at　the　heavens，they　began　to　understand　that　even　if　they　wanted　to　go　out　there　was　no　place　for　them　to　go.The　Japanese　had　prepared　no　dugouts　for　them.All　they　could　do　was　to　go　back　to　their　rooms.

Rey　Shuan　and　Yun　Mei　put　on　their　clothes　and　got　up，　and　walked　quietly　into　the　courtyard.Rey　Shuan　went　to　warn　the　neighbors　in　the　south　house.“Air　raid　alarm　—　whether　you　get　up　or　not　makes　no　difference　as　far　as　I　can　see.”　Then　he　went　outside　the　window　of　his　grandfather's　room　and　listened.If　the　old　man　was　asleep　he　need　not　disturb　him.

Yun　Mei　opened　the　gate　and　sat　on　the　threshold.She　had　decided　to　sit　there　until　the　all　clear　sounded.She　was　not　willing　for　Rey　Shuan　to　guard　the　gate　for　he　would　have　to　go　to　class　the　next　day，nor　was　she　willing　to　pay　three　dollars　an　hour　to　hire　a　man　to　stand　there　for　her.

Rey　Shuan　came　out　to　see　how　she　was　getting　on　and　she　said　to　him，　“Go　to　bed.”

“Let　me　stand　here　first　and　then　after　a　while　you　can　come　and　change　with　me.Who　knows　how　many　hours　there　will　be　in　one　session.”

“You　go　and　sleep.I　wouldn't　be　able　to　sleep　anyway.”

At　this　moment　the　Japanese　from　Number　Three　came　quietly　and　quickly　out　of　their　gate，and　walking　under　the　shelter　of　the　walls　like　a　group　of　thieves　they　ran　toward　the　main　street.

“What　are　they　going　to　do？”Yun　Mei　asked　in　a　hushed　voice.

“They　must　go　to　the　places　where　they　have　air　raid　shelters.Heng！”Rey　Shuan　stood　silent　awhile　and　then　went　back　into　the　courtyard.

In　the　darkness　Yun　Mei　—　from　the　shadows　and　sounds　of　coughing—began　gradually　to　recognize　that　outside　the　gate　of　Fourth　Master　Li's　house　was　his　fat　son，outside　the　gate　of　the　Widow　Ma　was　Cheng　Chang　Shun，and　outside　the　gate　of　Number　Six　was　John　Ting.Neither　she　nor　they　dared　to　say　anything.

More　than　half　an　hour　passed　and　nothing　happened.Old　Man　Chi　finally　came　out.“After　all　what's　it　all　about　anyway？Nothing's　happened，you　had　better　come　in.”

“You'd　better　go　to　bed，Grandfather.I　must　stay　here　to　watch.The　Japanese　may　come　to　inspect.”　Yun　Mei　managed　to　persuade　the　old　man　to　go　back　to　bed.

Yun　Mei　had　guessed　right.The　gendarmes　and　police　of　the　whole　city　had　been　mobilized　to　inspect　every　house.This　was　a　practice　but　the　Japanese　wanted　to　make　it　as　vivid　as　a　real　raid.Even　if　they　worked　the　whole　night　through　they　must　have　the　people　of　Peiping　thoroughly　trained，so　that　they　would　all　put　out　their　fires，and　their　lights，and　stay　in　their　rooms，in　order　that　the　Japanese　could　go　without　delay　to　the　safe　places，and　also　so　the　Japanese　families　would　not　be　in　danger　of　robbery.

They　came.Yun　Mei　saw　the　shadows　of　four　men　coming　from　the　west　and　quickly　stood　up.The　two　tall　ones　she　guessed　to　be　Fourth　Master　Li　and　Sergeant　Pai.The　two　short　ones　were　Japanese.

They　passed　by　Number　One　and　Number　Three　and　came　straight　towards　Yun　Mei.She　said　not　a　word　but　stood　aside.Neither　did　Fourth　Master　Li　nor　Sergeant　Pai　say　anything　but　followed　the　Japanese　into　the　courtyard.

There　was　no　light　and　no　fire.The　Japanese，using　their　flashlights，looked　at　each　window　and　it　was　black.They　came　out.

There　was　nothing　wrong　in　Number　Six.

When　they　reached　the　mixed　court　of　Number　Seven，however，both　Fourth　Master　Li　and　Sergeant　Pai　sweated　in　anticipation.

It　was　not　so　bad.There　was　no　fire　or　light　anywhere　—　the　people　of　Number　Seven　had　no　oil　or　coal.

But　when　the　flashlights　of　the　gendarmes　were　on　the　windows　Sergeant　Pai　sweated　all　over.There　were　at　least　three　families　who　had　not　pasted　black　paper　on　their　windows.Fourth　Master　Li　could　not　help　swearing，“His　mother's　—　！I　even　gave　you　the　paste，why　—　”

Sergeant　Pai　saw　how　serious　the　affair　was.He　would　very　likely　be　discharged　because　of　this.Quickly　and　angrily　he　questioned　the　people，“Why　did　you　not　paper　your　windows？Why？Didn't　Fourth　Master　Li　and　I　tell　you　about　it　again　and　again？”

His　words　were　said　to　the　people　of　Number　Seven　but　the　greater　half　was　for　the　Japanese　to　hear，to　clear　himself　and　Fourth　Master　Li　from　responsibility.

“I'm　really　sorry，”　a　woman　who　was　standing　apart　said　in　a　miserable　voice，“the　children　ate　the　paste.Sergeant　Pai，say　a　few　good　words　for　us.All　the　year　round　the　children　do　not　see　white　flour.”

Sergeant　Pai　had　nothing　to　say.

The　Japanese　gendarme　knew　very　little　Chinese　and　did　not　understand　what　the　woman　said.Without　distinguishing　black，red，　or　white，he　slapped　Fourth　Master　Li's　face　twice.

Fourth　Master　Li　was　stunned.Although　his　life　took　him　on　the　streets　and　among　all　manner　of　people，never　had　he　wished　to　use　force;　on　the　contrary，when　he　saw　others　fighting，no　matter　whether　they　were　holding　swords　or　sticks，he　would　take　the　risk　to　try　and　separate　them.

Anger　suddenly　filled　his　whole　body.He　forgot　his　love　of　peace　and　his　discretion　and　knew　only　that　before　his　eyes　were　two　beasts　who　dared　to　strike　a　white-bearded　old　man.Coldly，without　warning，he　raised　his　hand　and　struck　the　face　of　the　Japanese.He　felt　happy　and　satisfied.He　had　not　said　a　word　but　he　had　put　the　whole　of　his　strength　in　his　hand.

The　boots　of　the　gendarmes　kicked　viciously　at　the　old　man's　legs.The　old　man　fell.

Sergeant　Pai　dared　not　go　forward　to　separate　them.He　wanted　to　save　his　old　friend　but　he　feared　to　provoke　those　two　mad　and　wild　beasts.

None　of　the　people　in　the　courtyard　made　a　move.

The　old　man　seized　the　leg　of　one　of　the　gendarmes　and　threw　him.The　two　men　rolled　together　around　the　courtyard.

The　other　gendarme　followed　the　two　rolling　on　the　ground　and　went　forward　and　backward　waiting　for　his　opportunity，and　then　he　kicked　the　old　man　in　his　temple.The　old　man　did　not　move　again.

The　two　gendarmes　stopped　kicking　and　striking　and　told　Sergeant　Pai　to　put　in　prison　all　the　families　who　had　not　pasted　up　their　windows.

The　gendarmes　and　Sergeant　Pai　went　away，and　the　people　of　the　courtyard　like　a　swarm　of　bees　surrounded　Fourth　Master　Li.The　old　man　—　from　the　time　when　he　had　become　Head　of　the　Li　—　had　been　reviled　by　them　countless　times　and　now　because　of　them　he　was　lying　on　the　ground.Forced　by　their　poverty　they　had　cursed　when　there　was　no　cause，　but　now　they　all　wept.

The　people　carried　Fourth　Master　Li　home　and　he　was　unconscious　for　more　than　two　hours.Fourth　Mistress　cried　long　and　loudly　even　though　the　all　clear　had　not　yet　sounded.She　did　not　care　whether　it　was　“all　clear”or　not　“all　clear”;she　built　a　fire　to　boil　water　for　the　old　man　to　drink.All　in　the　Little　Sheep　Fold　forgot　the　air　raid　alarm，this　one　coming　in　and　that　one　going　out　to　see　Fourth　Master　Li.

At　about　two　o'clock　in　the　morning　the　all　clear　sounded.Old　Man　Chi　had　not　been　able　to　sleep.Once　in　a　while　he　would　come　out　to　see　Yun　Mei，and　then　he　would　go　to　his　room　and　lie　down.

Yun　Mei，with　an　old　wadded　coat　around　her，leaned　against　the　side　of　the　gate，or　sat　half-sleping　on　the　steps.She　wanted　very　much　to　go　to　see　Fourth　Master　Li　but　she　dared　not　leave　her　post.It　did　not　matter　whether　it　was　a　real　air　raid　or　not　she　must　do　her　duty.She　must　not　let　there　be　trouble　for　the　family.

A　few　minutes　before　the　all　clear　the　Japanese　of　Number　Three　all　clattered　home　and　Yun　Mei　knew　that　the　business　must　soon　be　over.

The　all　clear　sounded　and　Yun　Mei　ran　to　the　Li　home.Old　Man　Chi　followed　her.Fourth　Master　Li　opened　his　eyes　and　looked　at　them　and　then　shut　them　again.They　did　not　dare　to　say　anything　to　him.Old　Man　Chi　seeing　his　friend　of　many　years　lying　half　dead　wanted　to　cried　loudly.

“Grandfather，shall　we　go？”Yun　Mei　quietly　asked　her　grandfather.

Old　Man　Chi　nodded　and　slowly　they　went　away.

Fourth　Master　Li　was　unconscious　most　of　the　time　for　the　next　three　days.Then　he　opened　his　eyes　and　looked　at　his　wife　and　his　family;then　slowly　he　shut　his　eyes　and　never　again　opened　them.

Fourth　Mistress　Li　had　nothing　to　offer　those　who　came　to　console　her　yet　the　period　of　preparation　and　the　funeral　were　carried　out　according　to　tradition.People　who　owed　nothing　to　the　Li　family　knew　that　Fourth　Master　had　been　a　good　man　for　the　whole　long　lifetime，so　they　came　also　to　kowtow　the　three　times　for　him.Those　who　were　indebted　to　him　came　weeping　to　pour　the　libations　of　wine　before　him.And　those　who　were　indebetd　to　him　and　had　yet　reviled　him，all　came　to　pay　him　homage，to　pour　out　their　sufferings　and　shame，confessing　their　injustices.

Old　Man　Chi　wept　heartbrokenly.He　and　Fourth　Master　Li　were　the　pair　of　old　men　in　the　Little　Sheep　Fold.In　age，experience，and　temperament　they　were　more　or　less　alike;and　although　they　were　not　related　they　were　like　twins　in　their　history.With　Fourth　Master　Li's　death　there　was　no　one　in　the　whole　street　or　even　the　whole　world　who　would　understand　Old　Man　Chi's　“old　grain　and　rotting　sesame.”They　had　been　mutual　witnesses　of　each　other's　history.

Fourth　Master　Li's　funeral　was　handsome　and　well　attended.Those　who　moved　household　goods，those　in　the　coffin　shops，and　even　the　musicians　and　banner　carriers　were　all　his　friends.They　put　on　mourning　and　came　to　give　their　old　friend　a　good　send-off　and　went　with　him　all　the　way　out　of　the　city.They　had　no　way　to　avenge　his　death　but　could　only　use　ritual，music，the　procession，and　friendship，and　take　him　to　his　grave　where　he　could　sleep　in　peace.They　hoped　that　his　bones　would　not　be　dug　up　by　the　Japanese　as　they　had　dug　up　countless　graves　when　they　had　built　the　airfield　and　the　public　highways.





