20


Pao　Ching's　next　problem　was　to　find　a　house　for　the　bride　and　bridegroom　—　to　find　a　house　in　a　bombed_out　city　where　anyone　was　glad　to　pay　a　fortune　to　live　in　a　cave,　where　government　workers　slept　on　their　desks　in　their　offices　because　there　wasn't　a　room　to　be　had.

But　difficulty　was　a　challenge　to　Pao　Ching.　He　talked　and　smiled,　searched　and　persuaded,　pleaded　and　bribed.　The　result　was　a　dilapidated　house　that　had　been　bombed,which　someone　seemed　to　have　overlooked.　It　had　no　sunlight,　many　holes　in　the　walls,　and　a　lot　of　rats,　but　it　was　a　house.　Pao　Ching　persuaded　three　workmen　to　block　up　the　holes,　and　the　couple　having　duly　registered　their　marriage　in　the　appropriate　modern　form,　moved　in.　Phoenix　Girl　had　a　house,　Pao　Ching　an　accompanist,　and　the　troupe　was　making　money.　What　could　be　better？

Yes,　Pao　Ching　had　a　real　treasure　in　his　son_in_law.　But　his　victory　over　the　Tangs　had　a　bitter　taste.　Every　time　he　thought　of　having　tossed　his　loving　and　dutiful　daughter　into　the　arms　of　Little　Liu,　he　shuddered　with　shame.　He　had　always　considered　himself　a　cut　higher　in　morals　than　the　Tangs,　but　here　he　was　doing　much　the　same　thing.

Jeweled　Lute　was　now　the　model　of　professional　conduct.　She　always　arrived　on　time,　sang　her　numbers　and　went　home.　She　did　not　fight　any　more.　Her　losing　Little　Liu　seemed　to　have　matured　her,　and　on　more　than　one　occasion　Pao　Ching　was　sure　that　he　read　reproach　in　her　large　liquid　eyes.　To　Pao　Ching　it　was　as　if　she　were　saying,　“So　I'm　cheap.　I'm　a　whore.　That's　what　you　think.　Your　sweet　little　daughter　is　now　sleeping　with　the　man　that　the　whore　got　tired　of.　Ha！　Ha！"　Pao　Ching　burned　with　shame.

Phoenix　Girl　was　spoke　less　and　less.　She　came　to　see　her　mother　regularly　and　stayed　a　little　while.　She　was　mousier　than　ever,　a　drab　little　thing　without　expression　on　her　face.　Pao　Ching　hated　to　see　her　this　way,　but　he　knew　it　was　his　doing.　He　alone　could　read　the　thoughts　on　that　vacant　expressionless　face.　For　him,　Phoenix　Girl　was　forever　saying　silently,　“Well,　I　am　a　good　girl,　I　did　as　I　was　told.　Don't　worry　whether　I'm　happy.　I　shall　never　say　what　I　really　think.　I'll　keep　it　to　myself.　I　always　obey."

His　mind　became　morbid　with　self_reproach.　He　decided　to　keep　a　closer　eye　on　Lotus　Charm.　She　might　be　cheating.　He　was　convinced　that　even　with　her,　he　was　losing　the　closeness　that　he　treasured.　How　to　win　her　back,　how　to　restore　their　relationship　to　what　he　considered　nomal　between　father　and　daughter？　He　took　walks　down　town　to　buy　gifts.　She　accepted　them　as　always,　with　a　bright　smile　of　thanks,　and　then　forgot　them.

There　were　times　when　he　found　himself　staring　at　her　and　wondering.　Was　she　still　innocent？　She　was　growing　so　fast,　and　were　not　all　women　the　same？　Of　late　she　seemed　to　have　developed　astonishingly.　Her　bosom　was　much　larger.　Her　face　was　thinning　out　and　her　expression　was　more　intense.　Doubts　grew　within　him.　Was　she　worrying　about　something？　Was　her　heart　with　a　secret　lover？　Had　some　man　already　known　her？　There　were　times　when　she　looked　like　a　strange　woman.　At　others　she　was　a　little　girl　with　pigtails.　He　found　her　provoking,　and　at　the　same　time　alarming.

He　thought　of　taking　the　matter　up　with　his　wife.　So　desperate　was　he　at　times　that　he　was　near　to　asking　Mrs.　Fang　to　take　care　of　Lotus　Charm　and　give　her　the　motherly　guidance　he　could　not　supply.　But　reason　held　him　back.　Mrs.　Fang　would　laugh　in　his　face.　And　now　that　Phoenix　Girl's　pregnancy　was　beginning　to　show,　Mrs.　Fang　was　lavishing　all　her　mother　love　on　her　daughter,　hoping　passionately　for　a　grandson.　If　it　were　a　boy　she　would　not　need　to　go　to　an　orphanage　to　adopt　one.　Better　to　have　her　own　grandson　in　the　house　than　a　little　bastard　no　one　knew.　With　this　on　her　mind,　and　plenty　to　drink,　Mrs.　Fang　had　no　time　for　Lotus　Charm,　however　large　her　bosom　became.

Pao　Ching　was　sure　that　even　Lotus　Charm's　singing　had　changed.　Now　when　she　sang　love　songs　she　gave　them　depth　and　color,　as　if　she　understood　what　she　was　singing.　And　then,　by　way　of　being　completely　perverse,　on　certain　nights　she　sang　like　a　parrot,　without　feeling　or　emotion.　That　was　how　she　had　always　sung　before,　he　remembered,　but　why　was　she　so　unpredictable？　Perhaps　when　she　sang　like　a　parrot　she　had　had　a　tiff　with　her　lover.

One　day　he　met　an　usher　of　a　neighborhood　movie　house　in　a　tea　shop.　The　man　was　ingratiating　and　gossipy.　He　made　it　plain　that　he　expected　Pao　Ching　to　treat　him.　Pao　Ching　did,　and　the　usher　confided　his　news.　Lotus　Charm　liked　the　movies　very　much.　She　came　often,　and　the　usher　knowing　Fang　as　he　did,　always　let　her　in　free.　That　gave　Pao　Ching　a　new　worry.　Lotus　Charm　usually　told　her　mother　that　she　was　going　to　see　Phoenix　Girl,　but　instead　she　went　to　a　movie.　He　questioned　the　man　cautiously.　The　usher　was　sure.　His　daughter　was　always　alone.　Well,　Pao　Ching　decided,　it　was　a　harmless　deception,　she　was　safe　in　the　motion　picture　house.　But　if　she　could　tell　lies　of　this　sort　now,　what　would　she　do　when　she　really　wanted　to　get　away　by　herself　for　another　purpose？

Half　jokingly,　he　said　to　Lotus　Charm,　“I've　discovered　one　of　your　secrets.　You've　been　to　the　..."

“To　the　movies,"　she　supplied.　“It's　good　for　my　education.　I　can　read　almost　all　of　the　words　on　the　screen　now.　Our　own　language　only,　of　course.　The　foreigners　write　their　words　across,　not　up　and　down."　She　looked　at　him　inquisitively　and　went　on,　“I　am　going　to　study　a　foreign　language　one　day,　like　Teacher　Meng.　I　want　to　know　both　Chinese　and　English."

Pao　Ching　made　no　comment.　Instead　he　said　sternly,　“Lotus　Charm,　when　you　want　to　go　to　a　movie,　don't　go　alone.　Ask　me.　I　would　like　to　come　with　you."

When　Lotus　Charm　met　her　mother　a　few　minutes　later　she　announced　that　she　was　going　to　see　Phoenix　Girl　—　and　then　went　straight　to　the　movie　house.　She　had　reached　a　stage　in　her　development　where　motion　pictures　opened　up　a　new　world.　It　was　wonderful　to　be　sitting　in　the　half　light　watching　the　exciting　love　stories　on　the　screen.　Some　were　Chinese,　some　American.　They　were　new　gospel　to　her,　the　message　of　love　between　man　and　woman.　She　was　beginning　to　understand　that　love　was　essential　to　life,　that　it　was　nothing　to　be　ashamed　of.　For　a　woman　not　to　be　loved　was　shame;　for　a　woman　to　snare　a　husband　was　a　matter　of　pride.　If　this　was　wrong,　she　asked　herself,　why　did　the　movie　people　in　China　and　America　spend　so　much　money　making　love　stories？　And　had　not　Teacher　Meng　said　much　the　same　thing;　that　a　woman　should　fight　for　freedom　in　love,　just　as　American　girls　did　in　the　films？

Some　of　the　girls　reminded　her　of　Jeweled　Lute.　Those　half_naked　girls　in　the　American　films,　the　night　club　entertainers,　sat　on　men's　laps,　sang　and　danced　for　the　men,　and　kissed　them　in　public.　Obviously　the　girls　enjoyed　it,　because　they　smiled　and　laughed,　and　the　men　paid　them　well.　That　was　one　form　of　love,　and　it　was　interesting.　Perhaps　Jeweled　Lute　was　not　so　bad　after　all;　at　least,　she　did　not　do　such　things　in　public.　She　began　to　see　Jeweled　Lute　in　a　new　light.　Jeweled　Lute　was　having　fun,　doing　what　the　Hollywood　stars　were　doing,　but　she　...　She　looked　at　herself　mentally.　She　was　just　a　gray　unimportant　little　nobody,　who　wasn't　brave　enough　to　have　fun.　Only　brave　enough　to　sit　and　watch　love　in　a　movie　house,　against　her　father's　wishes.

And　Phoenix　Girl　had　her　points,　too.　No　wonder　she　was　eager　to　get　married.　A　woman　could　really　have　fun　only　when　she　was　with　a　man.　The　couple　on　the　screen　kissed　in　close_up.　The　sight　of　their　lips　meeting　sent　warm　pangs　of　frustration　throbbing　inside　Lotus　Charm's　young　body.　And　Phoenix　Girl　had　said　she　got　married　merely　because　her　parents　wanted　her　to.　What　utter　nonsense！　Phoenix　Girl　married　to　get　all　this,　and　more.　She　was　angry　at　Phoenix　Girl.　Jeweled　Lute　had　at　least　been　honest.　Phoenix　Girl　was　so　sly　and　cunning.　That　quiet　little　face,　looking　so　good,　and　all　the　time　she　was　enjoying　marriage.

Lotus　Charm　went　home　to　her　room.　The　movie　had　unsettled　her.　She　wanted　to　be　modern　and　free　as　the　women　on　the　screen.　She　took　off　her　dress　and　sat　down　on　the　bed,　her　bare　legs　widespread.　This　was　the　modern　attitude.　A　few　months　ago　she　would　not　have　dared　take　such　liberties　even　when　she　was　alone.　But　now　it　made　her　feel　good,　to　lie　back　on　the　bed,　with　one　leg　flat　and　the　other　bent　at　the　knee.　Freedom,　liberty,　being　grown_up.

Then　she　sat　up.　With　brush　and　paper　she　began　to　write　a　letter　to　an　imaginary　lover.　To　be　modern,　she　must　have　a　boy　friend.　Who　it　was,　did　not　matter.　She　had　so　much　to　tell　him.　She　touched　the　brush　to　the　ink　pad.　Her　mother　did　not　love　her.　Her　sister　was　married.　She　was　alone　in　a　world　of　her　own.　She　must　have　a　lover.

Who　was　her　lover？　Why,　there　was　Mr.　Meng.　Teacher　Meng,　the　mortal　with　a　mind,　the　user　of　beautiful　words;　Tllcher　Meng,　who　had　given　her　the　power　to　write.　Teacher　Meng,　she　wrote.　No,　that　was　wrong.　How　could　a　girl　address　a　lover　as　teacher？　But　what　else　could　she　call　him？　Other　words　for　lover　sounded　cheap　and　undignified.　Teacher　Meng,　she　felt,　would　be　dignified　even　in　the　most　passionate　of　love　scenes.　So　let　it　go.　“Teacher　Meng　...　Will　anyone　ever　love　a　girl　like　me？　Will　some　man　take　me　and　awake　me　to　love？"　Now　what　to　write.　The　thoughts　were　there,　but　not　the　words.　Her　words　sounded　improper　all　at　once.　She　stared　at　the　paper.　Everything　that　troubled　her　was　written　in　those　two　sentences.

Then　she　looked　up.　Teacher　Meng　was　standing　at　her　elbow.　She　sat　looking　up　at　him,　her　bare　legs　sprawled,　her　bare　shoulders　showing　above　her　slip.　In　her　hand　was　the　piece　of　paper　—　the　love　letter.　Suddenly　she　blushed　and　drew　in　her　legs.

“What　are　you　doing,　little　pupil？"　inquired　Teacher　Meng.

“Just　writing　a　letter,"　she　said.　Quickly　she　put　on　her　dress.

“Excellent.　But　who　is　the　letter　to？"

She　smiled　and　hid　the　paper.　“Just　to　someone."

“Let　me　see　it."　He　put　out　his　hand.　“There　may　be　some　errors."

She　dropped　her　eyes　and　handed　it　to　him.　She　heard　him　chuckle　and　looked　up　sharply.

“Why　a　letter　to　me,　Lotus　Charm？"　he　asked.

“Oh,　it　was　just　fun　..."

He　read,　and　raised　his　eyebrows.　“…`A　girl　like　me？'　What　does　that　mean,　Lotus　Charm？"

“It's　what　I　wanted　to　ask　you,"　she　said.　She　was　never　shy　with　Teacher　Meng.　With　him　she　could　ask　anything.　“I　want　to　know　if　a　man　will　ever　love　a　girl　of　my　class."

He　laughed,　tossing　his　thin　face.“Oh,　Lotus　Charm,"　he　exclaimed　enthusiastically,　“how　you　have　changed.　How　you　have　grown　mentally　and　physically.　I　can　answer　this　only　by　saying　that　if　you　want　to　improve　yourself,　if　you　are　determined　to　study　hard,　you　can　be　like　any　other　moderen　girl　and　find　a　man　to　love　you.　You　will　be　happy　then,　as　happy　as　any　other　woman.　If　you　don't　work　hard　you　may　find　love,　but　you　won't　be　happy　because　you　will　not　have　improved　your　mind.　You　can　read　a　little　now,　you　must　read　more.　You　need　to　go　to　school,　to　associate　with　modern　girls　and　learn　things　they　learn."

“I,　go　to　school？　Where？　My　father　would　never　allow　that."

“I'll　talk　to　him.　I　think　I　can　persuade　him.　He　loves　you　in　his　old_fashioned　way,　and　I　think　he　will　understand　that　education　is　for　your　good."

After　the　lesson　Mr.　Meng　found　Pao　Ching　alone.　And　Pao　Ching　was　delighted　to　see　him.　Of　all　the　men　he　knew,　Meng　Liang　was　the　only　one　he　really　appreciated,　the　only　one　who　could　fill　the　gap　left　by　Useless　Fang's　death.

Meng　Liang　came　quickly　to　the　point.　“You　must　do　something　about　Lotus　Charm,　elder　brother,"　he　said.　“She　is　getting　older　now,　and　is　at　a　dangerous　age.　She　knows　something,　but　not　enough.　She　has　no　mother,　and　few　friends.　Since　Phoenix　Girl　married　she　has　no　girl　friend　near　her　own　age.　It　would　be　easy　for　her　to　get　into　trouble,　to　meet　bad　company　and　be　corrupted.　It　can　all　happen　so　quickly."

Pao　Ching　looked　at　Meng　Liang　with　the　admiration　he　might　have　bestowed　on　a　beneficent　god.　How　did　he　know　what　was　on　his　mind,　day　and　night？　What　a　wonderful　heart　he　must　have.

“My　dear　friend,　that　is　just　what　I　was　going　to　talk　to　you　about.　I　have　been　desperately　worried　ever　since　Phoenix　Girl　was　married.　At　all　costs　I　must　protect　Lotus　Charm,　but　I　am　at　my　wit's　end.　How　shall　I　protect　her？　I　have　always　said　that　you　are　the　only　living　soul　with　whom　I　could　discuss　the　matter,　and　not　be　laughed　at."

Meng　Liang　looked　Pao　Ching　squarely　in　the　eye.　He　said　with　slow　precision,　“You　have　decided　finally　that　you　are　not　going　to　sell　her？"

“Certainly.　I　want　her　to　help　me　for　a　few　more　years,　and　then　I　want　to　marry　her　to　a　fine　young　man."

Meng　Liang　scoffed.　“You　really　mean　you　are　not　going　to　sell　her　for　money,　but　you　are　going　to　find　some　young　man　of　whom　you　approve,　and　marry　her　to　him.　Haven't　you　forgotten　something？"

“What　have　I　forgotten？"　Pao　Ching　was　half　amused.

“Love　—　the　affection　of　two　people　for　each　other."

“Love？　What　is　that？　You　mean　that　kind　of　vulgar　exhibition　you　see　in　the　movies？　The　thing　that　makes　young　people　marry　one　day　and　divorce　the　next？　We　can　do　without　that."

“You　don't　approve　of　love,　eh？"

Pao　Ching　hesitated.　He　did　not　want　to　offend　Meng　Liang.　Meng　Liang　belonged　to　the　theater,　and　his　ideas　were　not　the　ideas　of　a　respectable　middle_class　person.　He　decided　to　listen,　rather　than　express　his　own　opinion.

“I　know　you　don't　approve　of　marriage　by　personal　choice;　because　you　don't　understand　what　love　between　man　and　woman　really　means,"　began　Meng　Liang.　“But　you　should　try.　Don't　forget　we　are　living　in　a　modern　age　today,　and　we　must　keep　up　with　the　times.　Love　may　not　concern　you　or　me,　but　it　is　more　important　than　food　to　the　younger　generation.　It　is　life　itself.　No　one　can　stop　these　young　creatures,　now　they　have　gained　the　knowledge　that　love　is　really　important.　You　cannot　stop　them,　and　you　should　not　try.　As　her　father,　I　suppose　you　can　use　your　authority　to　marry　off　Lotus　Charm,　but　what　good　would　that　do？"　Meng　Liang　paused　and　watched　Pao　Ching　carefully.　“Well,　it's　a　step　in　the　right　direction　that　you　have　decided　not　to　sell　her,　but　it　is　not　enough.　Why　don't　you　do　the　big　thing　—　give　her　complete　freedom,　and　the　education　to　make　good　use　of　it.　Give　her　the　same　chance　as　any　other　modern　girl."

Pao　Ching　was　stunned.　Meng　Liang's　tone　was　accusing　him,　and　he　felt　that　the　accusation　was　unjust.　He　felt　that　not　to　have　sold　Lotus　Charm　as　a　concubine　was　revolutionary　in　show　business.　And　he　was　proud　of　himself　for　having　decided　to　marry　her　off　to　a　decent　young　man.　Wasn't　that　enough？　Yet　Meng　Liang　was　talking　of　the　girl　falling　in　love　of　her　own　accord　and　choosing　a　man　for　herself.　Freedom　in　love　to　Pao　Ching　meant　only　one　thing　the　profession　of　Jeweled　Lute.　The　only　difference　was　that　professionals　made　money　and　these　others　didn't.　His　face　turned　red　as　he　thought　of　it.

“I　understand　your　difficulties,"　consoled　Meng　Liang.　“It　is　hard　for　a　man　to　change　his　way　of　thinking　in　a　flash.　The　conventions　of　generations　cannot　be　cast　off　in　a　minute."

“I　am　not　conservative,"　announced　Pao　Ching　firmly.　“But　I　am　not　too　modern　either.　I　take　the　middle　of　the　road."

Meng　Liang　nodded.　“Now　let　me　ask　you　this.　Since　your　wife　doesn't　care　about　this　girl,　she　won't　keep　an　eye　on　her.　And　you,　as　a　professional　man,　cannot　shadow　her　all　day.　If　she　ran　away　one　day,　what　would　you　do？"

“She's　already　been　to　the　movies　alone　without　telling　me."

“That's　just　it.　And　it's　your　fault,　my　friend.　You　won't　let　her　associate　with　other　girl　singers　because　you　are　afraid　they　will　corrupt　her.　She　has　no　friends,　no　social　life,　no　experience.　She　is　a　prisoner　of　your　old_fashioned　ideas.　What　are　you　going　to　do？　She　is　in　danger　now　of　being　bored　and　running　off　to　find　excitement.　Your　duty　to　her　is　to　let　her　meet　the　world　as　a　respectable　human　being　and　learn　from　experience　how　to　live.　She　won't　run　away　if　she　has　proper　friends　and　an　interesting　life."

“What　can　I　do？"　demanded　Pao　Ching.

“Send　her　to　school.　What　she　learns　there　doesn't　matter　so　much,　but　she'll　meet　other　girls,　make　friends　with　them,　and　learn　how　to　mix　with　people.　She'd　be　a　person."

“Isn't　what　you　are　teaching　her　enough？"

“No,it　isn't,　and　besides　I　cannot　keep　on.　I　may　have　to　move　off　at　any　moment."

Pao　Ching　was　puzzled.　“Why　—　what　do　you　mean？　Why　would　you　have　to　move？"

“Because　my　life　is　in　danger.　My　security　is　threatened."

“I　don't　understand.　Who　would　kill　you？　Who　threatens　you？"　Pao　Ching　had　forgotten　Lotus　Charm's　problem.　He　was　unhappy　at　the　prospect　of　losing　his　friend.

Meng　Liang　laughed.　“I　haven't　done　anything,　and　no　one　has　done　anything　to　me　—　yet.　But　I　am　a　liberal,　and　my　ideas　are　always　clashing　with　the　government's　conservative　policy,　and　our　leaders'　desire　to　hold　on　to　feudal　power."

“I　don't　understand.　What　has　feudal　power　to　do　with　your　going　away？"

The　dramatist　shook　his　head.　His　eyes　flecked　with　amusement.　“You　see,　you　don't　know　what　is　happening　outside　your　immediate　sphere.　Modern　times　have　passed　over　your　head.　My　friend,　this　war　of　resistance　which　China　is　fighting　against　the　Japanese　is　not　a　simple　matter.　It　is　complicated.　We　have　a　war　inside　as　well　as　outside　China.　The　conflict　between　new　ideas　and　old　ideas　has　not　lessened　because　of　the　war.　China　is　a　republic,　but　feudalism　still　remains.　We　are　fighting　two　wars　now,　one　that　started　forty　years　ago,　the　other　the　latest　skirmish　with　the　invader.　Who　can　say　which　is　the　more　important.　I　am　a　playwright.　My　duty　is　to　present　new　ideals,　new　ideas,　new　methods,　new　ethics.　And　the　new　clashes　with　the　old,　so　I　have　offended　the　old　crumbling　system,　that　still　has　teeth　enough　to　destroy.　The　government　is　watching　the　theater.　Some　of　our　people　have　already　been　arrested　for　being　too　liberal.　The　administration　does　not　like　the　progressives.　Everything　I　have　written　bears　my　name.　Sooner　or　later　they　will　catch　up　with　me.　I　shall　be　arrested　or　murdered,　for　never　will　I　surrender　my　right　to　free　speech."

Pao　Ching　laid　his　hand　on　the　poet's　shoulder.　“Please　don't　worry,　my　friend.　If　you　are　ever　arrested　I　know　important　people　who　would　release　you."

Meng　Liang　laughed　loudly.　“My　dear　second　elder　brother,　don't　be　so　provincial.　Your　way　of　helping,　well　meaning　as　it　is,　would　never　fit　my　case.　I　am　a　lost　soul.　Today　I　could　become　a　government　official　if　I　wished.　I　could　have　money　and　power,　such　power　as　you　might　never　dream　of.　But　I　refuse　it.　I　do　not　want　their　money.　I　want　to　be　allowed　to　speak　freely.　In　some　respects　what　is　happening　to　Lotus　Charm　is　happening　to　me.　She　and　I　are　both　fighting　for　something　you　will　never　understand.　And　let　me　tell　you　this,　my　dear　friend.　You　had　better　stop　singing　those　lyrics　I　wrote　for　you.　I　tried　not　to　put　any　radical　phrases　in　them,　because　I　did　not　want　you　to　get　into　trouble,　but　they　are　still　progressive　and　inspiring,　because　they　call　to　youth.　The　old　guard　is　anxious　now　about　its　future.　It　is　one　thing　to　make　the　people　fight　for　China,　another　to　reward　them　for　their　blood　and　tears.　All　that　our　leaders　expect　is　that　we　praise　them　in　the　old　way,　that　we　consider　them　as　saints　and　obey　them　blindly."

Pao　Ching　shook　his　head.　“I　confess　I　don't　know　what　this　is　all　about."

“Neither　do　you　understand　about　Lotus　Charm.　But　I　understand　you　and　your　wife,　because　I　was　like　you　once.　I　have　learned　the　hard　way.　I　have　gone　forward　with　the　times,　while　you　and　your　wife　have　stood　still.　Perhaps　I　have　been　leading　the　times　and　you　have　allowed　the　times　to　lead　you.　I　understand　Lotus　Charm,　and　you　don't.　That　is　clear,　my　friend.　So　this　is　what　I　say.　Give　her　a　chance.　I　shall　give　you　a　letter　introducing　her　to　the　head　of　a　girl's　preparatory　school.　If　you　wish,　she　can　go　there　and　have　a　chance　in　life.　If　you　do　not,　she　can　remain　forever　a　slave.　I　cannot　force　you."　Meng　Liang　picked　up　his　hat.　“But　remember,　my　friend,remember　these　last　words　—　in　case　we　never　meet　again.　If　you　don't　give　her　freedom,　she　may　take　it　and　meet　disaster.　If　you　give　it　to　her,　she　may　still　run　wild,　but　you　will　not　be　responsible.　Many　people　have　been　sacrificed　to　new　ideals,　and　she　is　no　exception.　But　I　think　it　better　to　be　sacrificed　to　a　new　ideal　than　to　an　old　one."　He　walked　to　the　door.　“I　am　going　now.　Who　knows　when　we　shall　meet　again.　My　good　friend,　my　good　second　elder　brother,　good_bye."　Then　he　turned　and　fled,　as　if　all　the　devils　of　reaction　were　chasing　him.





