Chapter　Fifteen


LAN　THE　EASTERN　SUN　had　moved　around　among　the　secret　service.In　one　day　he　had　arrested　twelve　students　and　one　teacher　from　the　School　of　Railway　Administration.What　all　these　thirteen　confessed　was　the　same-contact　with　Chungking.Their　fate　was　the　same-death.

The　Headmaster　of　the　Railway　School　was　discharged.Lan　the　Eastem　Sun　became　Acting　Headmaster.

His　greatest　objective　was　to　squeeze　the　grain　of　the　students.Thirteen　lives　to　accomplish　for　him　this　greatest　of　his　ambitions！He　was　excited　and　pleased　with　himself.He　was　now　a　department　head　and　a　headmaster.He　felt　that　he　was　indeed　great，as　great　as　the　Japanese　soldiers　who　had　competed　to　slaughter　and　rape　in　Nanking.

He　had　spent　two　hours　preparing　a　speech　for　his　inauguration.He　wrote　it　in　the　classic　style.He　knew　that　the　Japanese　liked　the　Chinese　who　wrote　in　the　classic　style.

But　before　he　could　read　his　speech　Fat　Chrysanthemum　had　already　driven　out　the　chief　accountant　who　had　been　appointed　by　Eastern　Sun　and　had　herself　taken　the　post.The　key　to　that　treas-ury　that　had　been　bought　with　thirteen　lives　was　taken　by　Fat　Chrysanthemum.Eastern　Sun　bit　this　fingernails　until　they　bled.He　wanted　to　order　the　servants　of　the　school　to　bind　her　and　take　her　home，but　she　had　already　drafted　Meydee　as　her　personal　guard.Meydee's　title　was　Dean　of　the　Girl　Students.Eastern　Sun　dared　not　offend　Meydee.

Up　to　the　time　of　Rearl　Harbor，Meydee　had　watched　the　Westerners　and　had　been　very　successful.She　not　only　spied　on　the　Americans　and　the　English，but　had　drawn　the　Germans，Italians，French，and　Russians　into　her　net.Her　body　had　become　international.

Because　she　was　used　to　being　with　Westerners　she　entirely　ignored　the　Chinese，she　thought　of　Chinese　men　as　impotent.To　seek　the　second　best　she　would　make　friends　with　the　Japanese　men.She　had　lost　the　Eastern　woman's　quietude　and　shyness，and　thought　of　herself　as　starting　a　now　pattern.

Lan　the　Eastern　Sun　dared　not　offend　Meydee　nor　did　he　dare　punish　Fat　Chrysanthemum.

Rey　Tang　thought　out　carefully　and　dispassionately　how　to　deal　with　these　three.

When　he　had　made　up　his　mind　he　met　Meydee　casually　and　as　if　by　accident.

Meydee　now　had　quite　a　bit　of　leisure.All　the　Westerners　in　Peiping　who　should　be　in　concentration　camps　were　in　concentration　camps，and　those　who　were　not　to　be　in　prison　had　arm　bands　showing　what　country　they　came　from.She　needed　no　longer　to　cultivate　them.

She　was　not　interested　in　the　work　of　the　school　but　was　only　helping　Fat　Chrysanthemum.She　went　to　the　school　in　the　afternoons　only，to　see　if　any　students　needed　discipline，and　whom　she　should　frighten　a　time　or　two.She　would　then　slip　away　from　the　school　and　go　to　the　places　of　amusement　to　pass　her　time.Her　mother　had　had　a　home　but　she　had　none　where　she　coluld　entertain　her　friends.When　she　was　at　leisure，however，she　was　welcome　everywhere.No　one　dared　to　treat　her　coldly.The　gambling　houses，the　opium　dens，the　brothels，the　theaters，and　the　cinemas　all　welcomed　her.Difficulties　could　be　solved　easily　if　one　had　her　as　a　friend.

On　this　day　Meydee　had　made　up　to　be　unusually　beautiful.To　dress　herself　up　had　become　her　greatest　comfort　and　enjoyment.She　knew　that　she　was　a　flower　that　would　soon　fade　and　that　she　must　use　great　care　in　dressing　and　make-up，and　she　was　afraid　each　morning　to　look　in　the　mirror.Without　the　red　lips　and　the　penciled　eyebrows　it　seemed　she　did　not　know　herself.

Her　lips　and　cheeks　were　painted　red　and　her　eyebrows　like　bamboo　leaves.Although　there　was　no　wind　she　had　a　white　gauze　scarf　over　her　hair.Her　red　dress　of　thin　light　wool　fitted　her　closely，and　showed　clearly　her　breasts　and　hips.Hanging　from　her　shoulders　was　a　short　Persian　lamb　coat　which　showed　her　plump　and　beautiful　legs.

The　gauze　on　her　head，her　red　gown，and　her　fur　coat　had　all　been　bought　with　her　body.She　could　not　remember　which　had　been　given　her　by　which　White　Russian，and　which　she　had　accepted　from　a　French　merchant.She　felt　only　that　she　should　be　proud　of　herself，that　in　this　Peiping　that　lacked　everything，she　still　could　dress　so　well.

Rey　Tang　followed　Meydee　from　a　short　distance.He　was　troubled　in　his　heart.That　girl　who　looked　like　a　bird　of　prey　had　been　his　boyhood　love　and　an　angel.He　looked　at　her　back.His　warm　young　blood　rose　like　a　tide　in　his　mind.

Would　he　want　to　keep　company　with　a　bird　of　prey？Nonsense.The　tide　of　his　hot　blood　receded.He　must　control　himself.He　was　not　a　young　man　of　peaceful　years.He　must　be　cold　and　make　himself　as　hard　and　cold　as　a　piece　of　ice.He　straightened　his　back　to　show　that　he　was　firm　and　hard.

At　the　front　gate　of　the　North　Sea　Park　he　pushed　forward　and　bought　the　entrance　tickets.“Meydee，do　you　remember　me？”he　asked　with　a　slight　smile　on　his　face.He　was　afraid　that　because　his　clothes　were　so　poor　Meydee　might　not　be　willing　to　recognize　him.But　Meydee　at　once　recognized　him　and　smiled　almost　naturally.“Oh，you，　Old　Three.”

In　her　smile　Old　Three　suddenly　saw　the　Meydee　of　before　the　war，as　sometimes　in　the　mirror　he　could　see　himself　of　eight　or　ten　years　ago.

He　looked　at　her　again.No，she　did　not　look　like　the　Meydee　of　before　the　war，but　he　still　hoped　to　see　that　Meydee.That　was　the　Meydee　he　had　loved-loved　in　his　dreams.

He　forced　himself　to　smile　and　went　with　her　into　the　park.He　stepped　forward　and　walked　shoulder　to　shoulder　with　her.Quite　naturally　she　gave　him　her　arm.

When　he　touched　her　arm　Rey　Tang　felt　a　lightness　and　exhilaration.Immediately　he　gave　himself　a　warning，“Be　careful，be　careful.”　He　moved　closer　to　her　but　his　heart　lost　that　lightness　and　exhilaration.He　was　arm　in　arm　with　a　prostitute，a　spy，an　enemy.If　he　let　himself　be　moved　by　her　he　was　a　lost　dog.

She　leaned　on　him.“Where　have　you　been　amusing　yourself　these　last　few　years？”　she　asked　in　a　casual　manner　as　though　it　did　not　matter　whether　she　asked　or　not.

He　looked　at　her　face　again　and　in　his　heart　he　spat.If　he　had　the　slightest　desire　to　love　her　it　would　be　low　and　shameful.He　was　a　good　Son　of　Han　who　had　traveled　to　the　south　and　to　the　north；he　should　regard　as　valuable　his　dignity　as　a　Son　of　Han.“Who，me？Don't　you　know？”　He　must　show　some　of　his　cunning；he　was　an　underground　worker　dealing　with　a　member　of　the　secret　service.

“I　really　don't　know.”

“What　does　it　matter　whether　you　know　or　don't　know？”　he　said　in　a　hard　voice.

After　walking　a　few　steps　she　suddenly　laughed.“Have　you　a　girl？”

Rey　Tang　could　not　guess　whether　she　was　teasing　him　or　whether　she　was　laughing　at　herself.“No，I'm　always　thinking　of　you.”

“That's　hard　to　believe.”She　smiled　again　but　immediately　became　silent.

Rey　Tang　thought　that　no　matter　how　low　she　had　fallen　she　was　after　all　a　human　being.There　was　still　some　feeling　which　could　not　be　changed.

There　were　not　many　people　in　the　park.When　they　came　close　to　a　great　old　willow　tree　Meydee's　shoulder　touched　Rey　Tang's　arm.They　walked　behind　the　tree.When　they　reached　the　back　of　the　tree　she　embraced　him.

Rey　Tang　looked　down　and　saw　her　face，her　eyebrows，eyes，and　the　red　lips　so　brightly　colored.It　seemed　as　if　he　were　not　looking　at　a　face　but　at　a　palette　smeared　with　thick　paints.He　wanted　to　push　her　away，but　her　breasts　and　legs　were　against　him-very　soft　and　seductive.

She　kissed　him.

He　could　not　help　but　hold　her　more　closely.She　was　no　longer　soiled，nor　low，nor　dangerous.She　was　his　once-beloved.Her　face　and　body　were　fragrant.

Softly　and　slowly　she　said，“Old　Three，I　still　love　you，truly.”

Pretending　to　be　touched　Rey　Tang　hung　his　head.

“Now　what？You　can't　even　talk.”　She　had　changed　again.She　shifted　the　weight　of　her　coat　and　walked　away.

Rey　Tang　hurried　after　her.He　could　not　let　her　go.She　had　kissed　him　and　said　that　she　loved　him，but　he　had　to　remember　how　much　young　blood　there　was　on　her　hands.No，he　could　not　let　her　go.He　must　be　as　hardhearted　and　ruthless　as　she.

Reaching　her　side　he　again　took　hold　of　her　arm.“Ha！　You　still　have　the　same　disposition.At　the　slightest　crossing　of　your　will　you　change　and　become　angry.”

“Of　course，”she　said　with　her　mouth　twisted.“Don't　be　a　fool.I　don't　give　my　kisses　for　nothing.”

“I　have　nothing　to　give　you　but　my　love.”Old　Three　could　hear　that　his　words　were　empty　and　unconvincing.

“Oh，you　are　still　the　way　you　were　years　ago　—　”Suddenly　she　refused　to　say　any　more.

“You　—　what　about　you？”

Meydee　still　said　nothing　but　came　closer　to　him.After　walking　a　few　more　steps　she　lifted　her　face　and　looked　at　him.“old　Three，I　will　give　you　whatever　you　want.Really，I　really　love　you.”

Old　Three　did　not　know　how　to　answer　her.

“Really，whatever　you　want　I　will　give　you，”　she　said　again.

Old　Three　saw　that　to　Meydee　there　was　no　difference　between　love　and　lust.He　aroused　her　old　feeling　for　him　and　she　wanted　to　express　that　old　love　with　lust.She　was　still　the　pure　Meydee　of　the　old　days　and　at　the　same　time　she　was　a　prostitute　who　sold　her　body.　Old　Three　warned　himself，“Forget　that　she　is　Meydee，forget　that　she　is　a　prostitute，remember　only　that　she　is　an　agent　of　the　Japanese　secret　service.”

They　had　reached　the　foot　of　the　White　Dagoba　which　seemed　tall　and　slender　in　the　thin　Sunlight.

“Shall　we　go　into　the　grottoes　under　the　Dagoba？”she　suggested　without　the　slightest　shame.

“Won't　it　be　cold　there？”Rey　Tang　purposely　pretended　to　be　stupid.

“It　is　warm　there　in　the　winter　and　cool　in　the　summer.”　She　began　to　walk　fast.

When　they　first　went　in，the　grotto　was　quite　dark　and　Meydee　held　Rey　Tang's　hand.Her　hand　was　so　warm，Rey　Tang　began　to　breathe　quickly.　She　was　not　a　prostitute　or　a　member　of　the　secret　police;　she　was　his　love.

They　went　slowly　down　several　stairways　and　came　to　a　little　piece　of　level　ground　where　there　was　a　square　stone　table　and　four　little　stone　stools.At　the　top　of　the　cave　was　a　hole　through　which　came　a　little　light.

Meydee　sat　on　one　of　the　small　stone　stools　and　Rey　Tang　sat　beside　her.

The　light　in　the　cave　was　weak　and　the　red　on　her　face　and　lips　was　less　glaring.Rey　Tang　seemed　to　see　the　Meydee　of　the　old.

“What　are　you　thinking　about，Old　Three？”　Meydee　asked.

“I？　I　am　not　thinking　about　anything.”

“You？”　She　smiled　at　him.“Don't　lie　to　me.I　know　all　about　your　business.”

Rey　Tang　glanced　quickly　in　all　directions　to　see　if　there　were　anyone　hiding.

“Don't　be　afraid.I　am　alone　here.　I　can　handle　you　alone.”

“What　do　you　mean？”

“Don't　you　understand？You　see，we　once　loved　each　other.”

Rey　Tang　nodded.

“Good.We　are　now　in　the　same　business，but　it　is　not　necessary　that　—　as　the　proverb　says　—　`those　in　the　same　business　are　enemies.'”

“How　are　we　in　the　same　business？”

“You　don't　need　to　play　stupid　and　speechless　before　me.Speak　out.　Your　life　is　in　my　hands.If　I　say　for　you　to　die　you　will　immediately　die.”

“Then　why　don't　you　say　it　？”　Rey　Tang　smiled.

“I　have　my　plans.”　Meydee　also　smiled.

“You　want　me　to　work　with　you.Is　that　it？”

“That's　about　it.You　give　me　your　information.I　will　give　you　my　love.”

“What　will　you　give　me？”

“Love，love.”

Rey　Tang　to　carry　the　pretense　took　her　hand.“Give　me　your　love　—　give　me　at　once.”

“At　once？You　haven't　accepted　my　terms.”

“First　love　me　and　I　will　promise　everything.”　He　drew　her　toward　the　inner　cave.

The　cave　became　narrower　and　narrower，and　darker　and　darker.Meydee　began　to　be　suspicious.“Won't　this　place　do？Why　should　we　go　further？”

Rey　Tang　was　silent.Suddenly　he　seized　her　around　the　neck　with　both　hands.　She　did　not　make　another　sound.

Rey　Tang　dragged　the　corpse　to　the　innermost　part　of　the　cave.He　wiped　the　sweat　from　his　head，and　then　took　Meydee's　badge　and　one　of　her　rings　and　put　them　in　his　own　pocket.

Standing　there　he　called　in　a　low　voice，“Meydee，”and　he　seemed　to　hear　her　laughter，that　laughter　of　many　years　ago.

He　ran　out　quickly.Outside　the　cave　the　sunshine，although　not　very　strong，made　him　shut　his　eyes.He　opened　his　eyes　and　began　to　walk　quickly　away.

When　he　left　the　park　and　saw　the　people　walking，and　the　carts　and　horses，he　was　almost　frightened.A　moment　ago　in　that　black　cave...now　sunshine，　streets，　people　walking　and　the　traffic.His　hands　that　a　moment　ago　had　been　so　hard　and　powerful　were　now　shaking.

He　looked　at　the　moat　of　the　Forbidden　City.He　wanted　to　put　his　hands　through　the　cracks　in　the　ice　to　wash　them.But　he　must　go　to　find　Fat　Chrysanthemum.Hum！Another　foul　and　stinking　woman！His　stomach　turned.There　was　no　other　way，for　this　was　his　work　and　he　must　do　it.

He　waited　in　the　neighborhood　of　the　Lan　house　for　Fat　Chrysanthemum.When　he　lifted　his　head　he　could　see　the　White　Dagoba.It　was　so　white　in　the　blue　heavens，　so　tall　and　beautiful.

“Second　Sister-in-law，”　Rey　Tang　seeing　Chrysanthemum　about　to　enter　her　gate　ran　over　and　called　her.

Before　Chrysanthemum　had　recognized　Rey　Tang's　appearance　she　had　recognized　his　voice.The　blood　drained　from　her　face.She　stood　still.

“Go，　go　inside，”　Rey　Tang　commanded　in　a　low　voice.

Fat　Chrysanthemum　walked　in　hanging　her　head.Old　Three　followed　her　closely.When　she　got　into　the　house　she　seemed　very　tired　and　threw　her　fat　weight　on　the　sofa.　She　had　no　regrets　but　much　fear.She　was　afraid　that　Rey　Tang　had　come　to　avenge　Rey　Feng.Except　for　her　dealings　with　Rey　Feng　she　did　not　feel　that　she　had　done　anything　that　could　be　considered　wrong.Her　conduct　of　the　past　few　years　she　thought　to　be　according　to　the　seasons　and　to　have　been　of　the　right　degrees.

Rey　Tang　took　out　Meydee's　badge　and　Ring　and　held　them　in　his　palm.“Do　you　know　these？”

Chrysanthemum　nodded.

“She　is　finished.She　was　the　first.You　will　be　the　second.”

Chrysanthemum's　fat　flesh　was　all　numb.Instinctively　she　wanted　to　run　away　but　she　could　not　move.“Old　Three，Old　Three，I　am　not　of　the　same　group　with　Meydee.I　don't　know　about　her　affairs，I　don't　know.”

“But　you　know　what　you　have　done.”

“I　—　I　have　never　done　anything　bad.”

Rey　Tang　put　the　badge　down　and　the　ring，and　raised　up　the　hand　that　had　just　killed.He　must　give　Fat　Chrysanthemum　something　bitter　to　eat.Right　and　left　he　slapped　that　fat　face　hard.

She　cried　out.　Rey　Tang　seized　the　hair　that　had　been　curled　with　money　taken　in　exchange　for　people's　lives.“If　you　make　any　noise　I　will　kill　you　at　once.”　The　fat　woman　shut　her　mouth.Blood　ran　out　of　the　corners.She　had　never　been　beaten　but　she　now　knew　what　pain　was.

“Don't　strike　me　again，　don't.”　She　held　her　face　with　both　of　her　hands.　“What　you　want　I　will　give　you.”

Hearing　this　speech　Old　Three　was　even　more　angry.Her　words　were　the　same　as　Meydee's，equally　low　and　shameless.

“You　are　afraid　of　death？”　Rey　Tang　asked　her.“I　can　ask　you　for　your　life　at　any　time　and　at　any　place.”

“Spare　me，Old　Three.”

“Liste　—　if　you　dare　to　squeeze　one　single　catty　of　grain　from　the　students　I　will　send　you　to　find　Meydee.Do　you　understand？”

“I　understand.”

“If　Eastern　Sun　dares　to　kill　another　student　I　will　hold　you　responsible.”

“His　affairs　—　I　—　”

“I　have　other　means　to　deal　with　him.I　am　telling　you　that　if　you　know　and　do　not　try　to　stop　him，I　will　kill　you　first.Do　you　understand？”

“I　understand.”

“There　is　a　place　in　the　school　for　a　teacher　of　literature.You　must　tell　Eastern　Sun　to　invite　Eldest　Brother　to　the　post.With　Eldest　Brother　in　the　school　I　will　know　your　every　single　action　and　those　of　Eastern　Sun.Don't　waste　your　energies　discussing　with　Eastern　Sun　how　to　catch　me.If　I　am　alive　you　two　can　live.If　I　am　put　in　prison　you　will　both　die.I　have　many　fellow　workers　in　this　city.They　would　avenge　me.Do　you　understand？”

“I　understand.”

“Here.”　Rey　Tang　took　out　a　small　envelope.Inside　was　a　cartridge.“Give　this　to　Eastern　Sun.Tell　him　I　brought　it.And　here　is　this.”　He　threw　Meydee's　ring　into　Chrysanthemum's　lap.“Give　this　to　him　also.If　you　do　not　listen　to　me，you　will　die　the　way　Meydee　died.”　Old　Three　took　up　Meydee's　badge　and　went　out.





