17


Marriage　had　a　profound　effect　on　Phoenix　Girl.　In　the　short　space　of　three　days　she　had　changed　miraculously.　Lotus　Charm　was　both　thrilled　and　bewildered　to　see　it.　How　could　a　girl　change　so　much？When　the　new　Mrs.　Tao　arrived　to　pay　her　first　visit　to　her　family,　she　looked　as　if　she　had　been　completely　made　over.　Her　eyes　were　sparkling,　her　face　radiant　and　composed　in　a　mold　of　supreme　happiness.　Even　her　body　seemed　different.　Before　her　marriage　when　she　put　on　a　dress,　she　had　always　looked　stiff　and　ill　at　ease,　like　a　prisoner　in　fabric;　as　if　the　dress　were　wearing　her,　not　she　the　dress.　Now　she　was　wearing　a　dress,　and　filling　it.　Her　breasts　showed　firm　and　tight,　giving　her　graceful　curves　for　the　first　time,　and　even　her　long　thin　arms　seemed　to　have　acquired　a　soft　supple　grace　that　was　attractive.

But　she　was　still　uncommunicative;　although　Lotus　Charm　was　astonished　to　hear　her　use　a　word　to　her　mother　that　she　certainly　would　not　have　used　when　she　was　just　Phoenix　Girl,　the　drab　little　daughter　of　the　Fangs.　So　that's　what　marriage　did.　It　gave　you　the　right　to　use　bad　words,　and　it　made　you　look　attractive.　She　wrote　the　thoughts　painstakingly　on　a　sheet　of　paper.

When　she　and　Phoenix　Girl　were　alone　she　asked　her　about　marriage,　and　whether　she　liked　it.　Phoenix　Girl　didn't　seem　to　hear.　She　was　looking　at　herself　in　the　glass,　and　raising　her　arms　to　see　how　tight　her　dress　was　across　her　newly　developed　bosom.

Lotus　Charm　tried　hard　to　study　after　that,　but　her　heart　felt　empty.　Somehow　words　were　not　enough.　She　wrote　out　all　kinds　of　questions　for　Meng　Liang.

Then　the　Tangs　arrived　in　South　Warm　Springs.　They　had　had　money　to　burn　and　had　taken　to　bad　habits　like　ducks　to　water.　Fourth　Master　and　Jeweled　Lute　began　to　smoke　opium,　and　they　taught　Little　Liu,　too.

Opium　smoking　was　really　Fourth　Master　Tang's　only　pleasure　besides　obtaining　money　at　someone　else's　expense.　He　smoked　and　smoked,　not　merely　because　he　liked　it,　but　because　he　felt　it　raised　his　social　position.　When　people　in　Chungking　knew　that　he　was　an　addict,　they　said,　“That　Mr.　Tang　must　have　money"　—　which　pleased　Fourth　Master　no　end.

So　he　smoked,　and　Jeweled　Lute　smoked,　and　so　did　Little　Liu.　And　the　more　they　indulged,　the　lazier　and　dirtier　they　became.　Mrs.　Tang　took　over　any　business　that　had　to　be　done,　but　she　lacked　the　necessary　charm.　She　lacked　charm　so　much,　in　fact,　that　when　people　saw　her,　even　the　meekest　would　growl　and　spit　before　she　had　a　chance　to　browbeat　them　with　her　fearsome　tongue.　The　Tang　business　fell　away　to　nothing,　and　smoking　opium　in　Chungking　was　expensive.　Local　officials　resorted　to　blackmail　so　they　too　could　afford　the　illegal　pleasure.　What　better　way　of　paying　the　cost　than　by　blackmailing　others　who　could　pay　to　avoid　being　thrown　into　jail.　Jeweled　Lute　had　been　arrested　once.　That　was　enough　for　her.　She　made　her　father　pay　heavy　protection　money　to　keep　them　all　out　of　jail.

When　they　returned　to　South　Warm　Springs　the　Tangs　were　broke.　Fourth　Master　washed　his　face　and　changed　his　clothes,　and　then　went　to　see　Pao　Ching.　Fourth　Master　looked　like　a　sick　yellow　ghost,　because　of　the　ravages　of　the　drug　habit,　but　he　could　still　argue　and　drive　a　bargain　without　insulting　everyone,　which　his　wife　could　not.　He　proposed　that　the　Tangs　and　the　Fangs　join　together　and　give　shows　in　the　local　tea　houses　for　the　summer.

Pao　Ching　did　not　want　to.　He　was　doing　well　enough.　And　he　was　busy　setting　Meng　Liang's　new　lyrics　to　music　for　the　next　foggy　season.　To　hell　with　the　Tangs.　Let　them　work　alone.　But　still　—　one　day　he　might　really　need　Little　Liu.　Useless　Fang　might　not　want　to　play　always.　He　was　erratic,　and　he　might　get　sick.　Playing　accompaniments　was　a　strain　for　an　older　man　unaccustomed　to　work.　And　Pao　Ching　himself　liked　to　take　it　easy.　When　Fourth　Master　found　him,　he　was　wearing　only　a　pair　of　loose　pants,　his　broad　bronzed　shoulders　damp　with　sweat.

When　Pao　Ching　told　him　that　he　would　have　to　wait　a　few　days,　that　he　was　too　busy　to　think　of　singing　in　tea　shops,　Fourth　Master　was　convinced　that　Pao　Ching　was　out　of　his　mind.　And　there　was　black　rage　in　his　heart　as　he　realized　how　lightly　his　former　associate　had　brushed　him　off.　He　would　have　to　even　the　score,　and　get　the　better　of　him.

He　sent　Mrs.　Tang　to　talk　with　Mrs.　Fang.　Mrs.　Tang　was　not　a　diplomat.　She　bellowed　at　Mrs.　Fang.　Was　she　crazy,　too,　to　sit　there　and　let　Lotus　Charm　and　Pao　Ching　do　nothing　when　they　could　be　earning　good　money　to　fill　the　family　rice　bowls？How　very　foolish！

All　this,　Mrs.　Fang　flung　at　Pao　Ching　when　she　next　saw　him.　He　took　no　notice,　so　she　repeated　what　she　had　said.　Still　he　didn't　seem　to　hear,　as　he　continued　setting　the　new　lyrics　to　music.　Finally　Mrs.　Fang　shouted　at　the　top　of　her　voice.　Pao　Ching　put　down　his　manuscript　and　got　up.　He　hitched　his　loose　pants　higher　round　his　waist,　and　said,　“Shut　up,　will　you？Now　listen　to　me　for　once.　Here's　what　I　have　to　say.　The　Tangs　are　not　our　sort,　and　I　want　nothing　of　them.　They　smoke　opium,　we　don't.　So　we　can　consider　ourselves　lucky.　And　consider　yourself　lucky,　too.　You　haven't　given　me　a　son.　But　do　I　fight　with　you　over　that？Do　I　want　to　take　a　concubine？No！You　drink,　I　don't,　so　let's　stay　that　way.　I　want　to　work　on　these　lyrics,　and　do　some　good　for　China,　and　I　need　a　rest　for　my　voice.　Is　that　too　much　to　ask？I　have　to　be　shouting　at　people　all　winter.　I　made　enough　money　for　you　to　live　in　comfort,　so　please　allow　me　to　do　what　I　like,　and　keep　that　Tang　family　out　of　my　affairs."

It　was　a　long　speech　for　Pao　Ching.　Mrs.　Fang　sat　back　in　her　chair,　speechless.　Her　husband　hadn't　unloaded　himself　of　so　much　to　her　for　years,　not　since　the　early　days　of　their　marriage.　And　he　had　done　it　when　she　was　sober,　which　meant　that　she　had　to　admit　the　reason　of　what　he　had　said.　How　right　he　was　,　so　right　that　it　hurt.　There　was　really　nothing　she　could　pick　on　to　dispute　now　she　was　sober.

Finally　she　said,　“You　said　I　gave　you　no　sons.　That's　true.　But　I'm　going　to　adopt　a　baby　boy,　and　quickly.　Then　you'll　have　a　son　around　the　house."

Pao　Ching　didn't　answer.　When　she　wasn't　watching　though,　he　stuck　out　his　tongue　at　her.　The　old　fool　thinking　she　could　look　after　a　baby.　She　couldn't　even　look　after　herself.

With　nothing　to　do　Lotus　Charm　began　seeing　a　great　deal　of　Jeweled　Lute.　She　had　to　have　someone　to　talk　to.　Although　Phoenix　Girl　had　never　said　much,　Lotus　Charm　had　talked　at　her　quite　a　lot.　Now　she　wanted　a　substitute,　and　Jeweled　Lute　was　the　only　girl　available.

Besides,　she　had　good　reason　to　see　a　lot　of　Jeweled　Lute.　The　other　drum　singer　knew　so　much　about　men　and　love.　Lotus　Charm　plied　her　with　questions　about　what　men　did　to　women.　Sometimes　Jeweled　Lute　told　her　something　and　somtimes　she　just　laughed.　Lotus　Charm　should　find　out　for　herself.　Anyhow,　Jeweled　Lute　made　things　clearer　to　Lotus　Charm's　immature　mind　than　did　Teacher　Meng.

Pao　Ching　was　angry　with　Lotus　Charm　for　going　with　Jeweled　Lute,　but　he　was　too　busy　with　his　transcriptions　to　worry.　He　told　his　wife　to　keep　an　eye　on　the　girl,　but　Mrs.　Fang　was　too　busy　drinking.

Then　Phoenix　Girl　came　home.　She　looked　as　if　she　had　been　run　over　by　a　steam　roller.　Her　eyes　were　dull,　her　face　long　and　drawn,　and　she　seemed　to　have　aged　twenty　years.

Lotus　Charm　could　hardly　wait　to　get　her　alone.　“Elder　sister,　what　has　happened？"　she　demanded,　shaking　Phoenix　Girl　by　the　shoulders.　“Tell　me,　is　anything　wrong？"

Phoenix　Girl　began　to　cry.　Lotus　Charm　shook　her　gently　as　if　to　waken　her.　“Tell　me,　elder　sister,　what　has　happened."　Through　a　mask　of　tears　Phoenix　Girl　began.　“I　found　out　the　truth　of　the　old　saying　about　following　a　dog　when　you　are　married　to　him."　She　rolled　up　her　sleeves.　There　were　black　blotches　on　her　arms.　“He　beats　me."　She　choked　and　hid　her　face　in　her　hands.

“Why？"　Lotus　Charm　was　insistent.　“Why？"

Phoenix　Girl　didn't　answer.

“Why　do　you　let　him？"

Phoenix　Girl　looked　at　her　with　scorn.　“Let　him,　stupid？I　am　no　match　for　him."

“Then　tell　father."

“What's　the　good？Father　can　do　nothing.　He　is　an　old　man.　Besides　he's　only　a　drum　singer,　and　I　am　a　drum　singer's　daughter.　What　can　he　do？"

Lotus　Charm　was　shocked.　Poor　Phoenix　Girl.　She　was　given　to　a　man　and　he　beat　her,　and　for　her　there　was　no　escape.　She　couldn't　earn　a　living,　so　she　had　to　put　up　with　it.　Suddenly　Phoenix　Girl　gave　a　low　moan.　“What　is　it？"　inquired　Lotus　Charm　in　tender　solicitation.　“What　is　it？"

“And　I'm　going　to　have　a　baby.　I　know　it,"　mumbled　Phoenix　Girl.　“He's　made　sure　of　that."　It　would　not　be　easy　for　her　to　get　married　again　if　she　had　a　baby.　She　made　Lotus　Charm　promise　not　to　tell　her　father,　then　fixed　her　face　and　went　home,　holding　her　head　high,　even　smiling　as　if　to　show　everyone　she　was　really　happy.

Lotus　Charm　told　Pao　Ching.　He　stared　at　her　as　if　she　were　telling　a　lie.　It　had　never　occurred　to　him　that　such　a　thing　might　happen.　Since　Phoenix　Girl　had　left　the　house　he　had　hardly　given　her　a　thought.　And　now　this　sleek　young　cockerel　was　beating　her.　And　what　could　he　do　about　it.　He　couldn't　go　and　argue　with　Sergeant　Tao.　What　good　could　that　do？Besides,　he　might　run　into　unexpected　trouble　at　the　Wang　mansion.　Sergeant　Tao　might　enlist　the　help　of　Wang　to　make　things　unpleasant　for　the　Fangs.　A　man　who　beat　his　wife　was　capable　of　anything.　Pao　Ching　felt　helpless.

Then　he　argued　with　himself　that　he　had　no　right　to　interfere　anyhow.　But　on　the　other　hand　perhaps　he　should.

He　would　think　it　over　and　decide　what　to　do.　He　warned　Lotus　Charm　not　to　tell　her　mother　or　Useless　Fang;　and　particularly　not　Jeweled　Lute.　If　the　Tangs　heard　of　it,　the　Fangs　would　be　the　laughingstock　of　the　town.

Lotus　Charm　looked　her　father　full　in　the　face.　Her　fists　were　clenched　on　her　hips.　“So　you　are　going　to　let　my　elder　sister　be　beaten　by　that　young　turtle　and　do　nothing　about　it？"

He　reddened.　“I　didn't　say　that.　But　we　have　to　think.　There　must　be　a　way　out."

Lotus　Charm　was　furious.　“I'd　kick　him　in　the..."　she　cried　angrily.　She　stamped　her　foot　and　added,　“Women　just　don't　have　any　luck.　It　doesn't　matter　whether　they　are　virgins　or　tarts,　they　all　get　the　dirty　end　of　the　stick."　And　she　let　go　with　one　of　Jeweled　Lute's　choice　epithets.

Pao　Ching　gasped,　and　went　on　his　way.　So　much　seemed　to　have　happened　since　he　had　been　setting　Meng　Liang's　words　to　new　music.　How　quickly　things　could　happen.

Lotus　Charm　kept　the　secret　until　Teacher　Meng　arrived　to　give　her　her　lessons.　Perhaps　he　would　have　a　solution.　As　an　educated　man　he　should　know　how　to　combat　brute　force　with　intelligence.　And　when　she　had　told　him　Lotus　Charm　added　her　ultimatum,　“I'm　not　going　to　study　any　more,　Teacher　Meng.　Our　family　is　unlucky.　It　is　because　we　are　singers.　Why　should　I　waste　time　when　I　will　never　amount　to　anything.　People　like　us　will　never　have　a　chance　to　rise　above　circumstances."

Meng　Liang　did　not　answer　for　a　while.　He　merely　sat　staring　into　the　sunshine.　Lotus　Charm　was　angry　at　him　for　his　silence.　This,　she　supposed,　was　another　of　those　questions　he　would　not　answer.

“Lotus　Charm,"　he　asked　at　last,　“what　are　the　Chinese　people　doing　now？"

“Why,　fighting　the　Japanese."

“Are　they　winning？"

“I　don't　think　so　but　they　are　fighting."

“Exactly,　but　why　are　they　keeping　on　fighting,　if　they　are　not　doing　so　well？"

“Because　if　they　don't　keep　fighting　they'll　be　conquered　by　the　Japanese."

“Exactly.　If　you　are　intelligent　enough　to　know　these　answers　you　don't　have　to　worry.　Now　consider　how　poor　our　country　is,　and　how　weak.　But　she　has　fought　a　war　of　resistance　for　three　years,　and　our　people　are　bracing　themselves　for　further　struggle,　the　great　fight　for　life.　Now　a　nation　is　like　an　individual,　because　a　nation　is　made　up　of　individuals.　And　individuals　have　the　same　experiences　as　nations　do.　In　particular,　the　struggle　for　life.　The　more　you　struggle　to　get　on,　the　more　difficulties　you　encounter.　You　have　to　make　up　your　mind　to　surmount　all　handicaps,　or　you　will　never　get　anywhere.　You　women　are　the　victims　of　an　antiquated　social　system,　so　strong,　so　enduring　that　too　many　of　its　poisionous　practices　still　exist.

“Take　me.　I　am　a　playwright　and　have　my　problems.　You　are　a　woman　and　you　have　yours.　Women　have　always　been　illtreated　or　ignored　in　this　ancient　country.　But　you　want　to　make　something　of　yourself,　so　you　must　fight　for　your　progress.　I　see　woman's　position　today　as　that　of　a　girl　with　bound　feet　competing　with　the　rest　of　the　world　in　a　track　race.　But　your　feet　are　not　bound,　nor　is　your　spirit.　All　that　is　necessary　is　to　work　harder.　Your　sister　got　beaten.　Why　did　she　get　beaten？Because　she　never　tried　to　make　anything　of　herself.　She　only　knew　slavish　obedience　and　honesty　to　the　family　system.　How　could　she　know　that　the　old　forces　that　degrade　a　woman　can　be　overcome　by　the　rebellion　of　women　themselves？If　we　hadn't　fought　the　Japanese　we　should　be　overcome　now.　If　you　don't　fight　prejudice　and　custom　you　will　be　overcome."

Lotus　Charm　thought　a　long　time.　Presently　she　said,　“I　still　don't　see　the　use　of　studying　any　more.　I　suppose　I'll　get　married　and　get　beaten　by　some　no_good　man."

Meng　Liang　laughed　impatiently.　“Oh　no,　you　won't."　He　flourished　a　pencil　and　scrawled　something　on　a　sheet　of　paper.　“Lotus　Charm,　allow　me　to　draw　a　new　life　path　for　you.　I　suggest　that　you　go　to　a　real　school　and　study　like　other　girls.　You　sing　in　the　evening　and　have　all　day　free.　So　go　to　school.　Then　you　will　be　like　a　person　with　one　foot　in　each　of　two　boats,　always　wise.　If　you　make　good　progress　you　can　develop　into　a　girl　student　instead　of　a　girl　singer.　If　you　don't,　you　are　still　a　girl　singer　who　will　have　greater　knowledge　than　any　other.　Does　that　appeal　to　you？School　by　day,　study　by　night.

“You　see,　I　want　you　to　be　independent,　to　be　able　to　earn　a　living　if　the　necessity　arises.　Imagine　how　much　better　Phoenix　Girl　would　be　if　her　parents　had　taught　her　a　trade.　She　could　have　left　that　low　character　and　earned　her　rice.　She　would　not　have　had　to　marry　him　in　the　first　place."

“So,　if　I　study　I　won't　have　to　become　another　Jeweled　Lute？"

“No　—　no　need　at　all."

“Do　you　think　my　parents　will　let　me　go　to　school？"

“I'll　talk　to　them,　and　I'll　persuade　your　uncle　to　help."

“But　what　about　my　sister？"

“That　is　a　different　matter.　We've　to　think　of　a　way.　Thought　always　conquers,　but　we　have　to　be　prudent.　At　the　moment　we　have　won　a　victory.　We　have　decided　that　you　won't　become　another　Phoenix　Girl,　nor　a　Jeweled　Lute.　Instead,　you　will　be　a　woman　of　free　China,　a　new　modern　woman　with　a　will　of　her　own,　and　the　ability　to　earn　a　living.　A　wonderful　prospect."

Lotus　Charm　decided　to　be　even　more　diligent　in　her　studies.　Every　day　she　would　learn　a　certain　number　of　words　before　the　sun　went　down.　To　her　the　words　were　as　flying　red　horses　that　would　carry　her　to　a　new　world　—　a　world　where　there　would　be　no　whores,　no　opium,　no　daughters　given　into　the　slavery　of　marriage;　a　world　full　of　intelligent　men　like　Teacher　Meng.　She　felt　important,　a　piece　of　young　China,　rising　out　of　the　musty　past,　moving　into　a　new　fragrance　of　life.

As　autumn　approached,　the　Fangs　got　ready　to　go　back　to　the　city　again.　But　they　had　lingered　too　long　in　South　Warm　Springs.　One　afternoon,　without　warning,　a　horde　of　enemy　planes　arrived　and　dropped　a　string　of　bombs　on　the　village.　What　they　were　after　no　one　knew.　The　village　had　no　military　establishment.　It　was　merely　a　health　resort　with　many　houses　owned　by　the　rich.　But　there　were　rumors　that　some　of　these　wealthy　people　owned　huge　reserves　of　gasoline　which　they　stored　in　tanks　to　sell　on　the　black　market　when　the　war　was　over.　And　some　Japanese　spy　may　have　told　the　enemy　that　these　gasoline　tanks　were　military　supplies.

There　was　the　shattering　explosion　and　a　toll　of　human　lives,　but　the　gasoline　tanks　were　unhurt.

The　Fangs　lived　on　the　outskirts　of　the　town　by　the　stream.　The　raid　came　so　unexpectedly　that　they　had　no　time　to　run　for　shelter.　Instead　they　went　into　a　field　and　lay　flat　under　a　rock　by　the　riverside.

All　except　Useless　Fang.　He　liked　to　walk,　and　he　did　not　like　the　mosquitoes　that　flew　round　the　rock　in　clouds.　So　he　walked　on　by　the　side　of　the　stream.　When　he　heard　the　buzzing　of　the　planes　in　the　sky　he　looked　up　placidly　and　decided　that　they　were　on　their　way　to　Chungking.　Certainly　they　wouldn't　drop　anything　on　South　Warm　Springs.　They　made　a　pretty　sight,　silver　airplanes　in　a　blue　sky,　with　little　puffballs　of　white　smoke　bursting　among　them,　as　the　Chungking　aircraft　began　to　shoot.　Pretty　sight.　Too　bad　the　gunners　never　hit　the　planes.　Too　bad　—　someone　should　do　something　about　that.

The　planes　went　on.　Useless　Fang　sat　under　his　favorite　tree.　“So　it　goes　on,"　he　thought　to　himself.　“An　air　raid,　more　houses　destroyed,　more　people　killed.　How　senseless　it　all　is.　When　will　men　learn　better？"

Then　the　planes　came　back.　Useless　Fang　wondered.　Suppose　they　had　come　to　bomb　the　town.　Perhaps　he　had　better　take　shelter.　But　he　stood　staring　at　the　silver　wedge　of　planes　humming　through　the　air.　Pretty　sight.　Strange　beauty.　The　guns　never　hit　them.　Better　run.　They　might　drop　a　bomb.　Go　back　to　the　rock,　get　out　from　under　the　tree.　You　might　get　hit.

Useless　Fang　began　to　run.　He　heard　the　great　singing　sound　of　a　bomb.　He　felt　the　earth　shudder　with　a　quivering　thud.　Then　another　bomb　swished　down.　The　explosion　seemed　to　press　in　on　his　ears.　He　kept　running　until　a　huge　rock　torn　out　of　the　ground　by　the　explosion　of　the　last　bomb　came　sailing　through　the　air　and　struck　him　in　the　head.

Pao　Ching　found　his　brother　a　little　distance　from　the　tree　where　he　usually　sat.　Useless　Fang　lay　on　his　face,　his　legs　sprawled.　Pao　Ching　touched　him.　“Elder　brother,　elder　brother,　wake　up."　There　was　no　answer.

He　turned　Useless　Fang　over.　There　was　no　blood,　no　wound.　He　was　just　asleep.　He　must　be　—　or　drunk.　Pao　Ching　picked　him　up,　and　supported　him　against　his　knee.　Useless　Fang's　head　lolled　over　as　if　his　neck　were　made　of　rubber.

Pao　Ching　still　could　not　believe　his　brother　was　dead.　He　sniffed　at　his　breath.　But　Useless　Fang's　lips　were　set　and　cold,　there　was　no　breath,　and　his　hands　were　wet　and　limp　as　a　fish.

Lotus　Charm　came　up　then,　and　burst　into　tears.　Pao　Ching　put　his　brother　gently　on　the　grass,　and　fanned　at　the　flies　which　dived　down　to　settle　on　the　dead　face.　“Elder　brother,　elder　brother,　why　did　it　have　to　be　you.　.　."

Lotus　Charm　told　her　mother,　and　soon　the　whole　family　was　weeping.　Then　came　the　neighbors　to　weep,　out　of　politeness　to　the　Fangs.　They　gathered　in　a　group　round　Pao　Ching　who　stood　like　a　statue　over　the　body　of　his　brother.　His　eyes　were　bright　and　dry,　but　his　face　was　racked　with　grief.　He　could　not　move　or　speak.

And　it　had　to　be　Useless　Fang,　the　brother　who　had　lived　on　him　for　so　long,　who　always　came　to　his　rescue　in　an　emergency.　The　brother　who　was　so　intelligent,　who　was　so　honest　and　so　helplessly　critical,　the　great　musician　—　the　learned　one.　Poor　Useless　Fang.　His　only　worry　had　always　been　to　die　away　from　his　native　town.　And　now　here　he　was　stricken　in　this　remote　mountain　region　far　from　home.

The　sun　had　long　gone　down,　and　the　moon　was　now　high　in　the　bleak　dark　sky.　The　neighbors　had　gone　home,　but　Pao　Ching　still　stood　over　the　body　of　his　brother.　Shortly　before　morning,　Lotus　Charm　approached　her　father　and　tugged　at　his　sleeve.　“Come　home,　father,"　she　whispered.　“Let　us　take　him　away."





