Chapter　Twenty-four


JF　THE　HORRORS　of　war　could　be　shown　in　the　eyes　of　a　child　they　were　shown　in　the　eyes　of　Little　Niu　Niu.

Because　of　hunger　she　could　not　run　and　jump　and　play.　Her　neck　was　so　thin　it　seemed　very　long，　and　this　long　thin　neck　seemed　unable　to　support　her　head　in　spite　of　the　fact　that　there　was　not　much　flesh　on　her　face.　Her　old　and　worn　trousers　and　coat　were　too　short　but　were　not　tight　for　there　were　bones　only　left　in　her　body.　It　was　as　though　she　were　already　half　dead.

When　she　refused　to　eat　Republic　flour　her　little　eyes　would　seem　to　say　to　the　family　that　she　had　the　dignity　of　her　little　life:　she　would　not　eat　what　dogs　and　pigs　would　not　eat.　Her　determination　could　not　be　shaken.　No　one　could　force　her.　And　no　one，　because　of　this，　felt　like　scolding　her.　The　anger　in　her　eyes　seemed　to　represent　the　hatred　of　war　for　them　all.

When　her　anger　was　over　she　would　half-open　and　half-shut　her　little　eyes，　and　look　stealthily　at　the　family　as　though　to　apologize，　to　beg　them　to　forgive　her.　She　could　not　say，　“In　time　of　trouble　such　as　this　I　should　not　lose　my　temper，”　but　her　eyes　said　it　for　her.　Then　slowly　she　would　shut　her　eyes　and　bury　all　her　sufferings　in　her　little　heart.

Although　her　eyes　were　shut　she　knew　that　the　grown　people　came　often　to　see　her　and　to　sigh　for　her　in　secret.　She　knew　that　they　would　give　her　pity　and　love　so　she　controlled　herself　and　did　not　cry　out.　She　must　bear　the　pain　in　patience.　War　had　taught　her　how　to　suffer　in　patience.

She　would　doze　awhile　and　then　when　she　again　opened　her　eyes　would　force　herself　to　smile.　blinking　her　little　eyes　she　cheated　herself　—　she　was　a　good　Little　Niu　Niu　that　smiled　as　soon　as　she　woke.　And　so　she　made　all　love　her.

If，　by　good　chance，　the　grown　people　had　something　for　her　to　eat，　her　eyes　would　open　wide;　she　would　think　only　that　that　bit　of　food　might　help　her　to　live.　Her　eyes　would　brighten　as　though　she　were　about　to　sing　—　to　praise　life.

When　she　had　eaten，　her　eyes　would　show　a　light　like　sunshine　after　a　long　rain，　and　would　seem　to　say，　“How　easily　life　can　be　satisfied！　With　a　little　food　we　can　continue　to　live　happily.”　At　such　a　moment　she　would　even　remember　the　stories　her　grandmother　told　her.

But　soon　the　smile　in　her　eyes　would　disappear.　She　had　not　had　enough　to　eat　and　wanted　more.　How　small　that　piece　of　melon　had　been，　or　that　shaoping.　Why　should　she　have　so　small　a　piece　to　eat？　Why？　But　she　would　not　ask.　She　knew　that　her　brother，　Little　Precious，　had　not　had　even　a　small　piece　of　melon.

Rey　Shuan　dared　not　look　at　his　little　daughter.　The　British　and　American　navies　were　approaching　the　homeland　of　Japan.　He　knew　that　the　war　god　of　the　east　would　before　long　surrender　unconditionally　as　had　Germany　and　Italy.　He　should　be　happy.　But　of　what　use　to　be　victorious　over　Japan　and　not　be　able　to　save　his　little　daughter？　Life　once　gone　could　not　come　back　again.　What　crime　had　Little　Niu　Niu　committed　that　she　should　die　like　this？

Old　Man　Chi　had　lately　had　no　energy　to　care　for　anything，　but　he　would　force　himself　to　be　concerned　about　Little　Niu　Niu.　The　oldest　and　youngest　hearts　meet　easily.　Whenever　Yun　Mei　was　able　to　get　something　other　than　Republic　flour　for　him　to　eat，　he　would　not　even　look　at　it，　but　would　say　to　her，　“Give　it　to　Niu　Niu.　I　have　already　reached　the　time　to　die，　but　Niu　Niu—　”　and　then　he　would　sigh　deeply.　He　knew　that　even　if　Niu　Niu　got　that　bit　of　food　it　was　doubtful　whether　she　could　become　strong　and　healthy.　He　also　thought　of　his　son　who　had　died，　and　of　the　two　sons　of　his　son　who　had　disappeared.　What　if　something　should　happen　to　the　last　of　the　four　generations　in　one　house！　In　the　night　when　he　could　not　sleep，　he　often　prayed，　“Heavenly　Old　Grandfather，　take　me　back，　take　me　back，　but　ten　thousand，　leave　Little　Niu　Niu　to　the　Chi　family.”

Yun　Mei's　maternal　eyes　had　long　ago　seen　the　danger，　but　she　could　not　enlarge　upon　the　small　signs　and　make　the　old　people　more　worried.　She　would，　on　the　contrary，　often　pretend　to　be　unconcerned.　“Nothing　serious，　nothing　serious.　Niu　Niu　is　a　little　girl　—　little　girls　are　hardy.”

Although　she　talked　this　way　she　suffered　in　her　heart　more　than　any.　Niu　Niu　was　her　child.　In　her　plans　for　the　future　Niu　Niu　was　the　center　of　her　hopes.　If　she　shut　her　eyes　she　could　see　Niu　Niu　growing　into　a　beautiful　young　woman，　see　her　marriage，　her　sons　and　daughters　—　and　herself　a　grandmother，　an　old　woman　of　dignity　and　position.

Little　Precious　was　indeed　important.　From　the　point　of　view　of　the　ancestors，　he　was　to　carry　on　the　Chi　family　line，　but　he　was　a　boy　and　Yun　Mei　could　not　put　herself　in　his　place　and　with　her　whole　heart　think　and　plan　for　him.　Niu　Niu　was　a　girl　and　Yun　Mei　could　use　her　own　experience　and　think　of　Niu　Niu's　future.　Mother　and　daughter　are　a　mutual　necessity　to　each　other.

Yun　Mei　dared　not　think　that　Niu　Niu　might　die.　Indeed，　if　Niu　Niu　died，　half　of　Yun　Mei　would　die.　To　say　the　most　heartless　thing　—　Old　Man　Chi　and　Mrs.　Tien　Yiu　could　die，　but　Niu　Niu　must　live.　Old　people　were　like　autumn　leaves　—　they　should　drop　off　when　the　time　comes.　But　Niu　Niu　was　a　fresh　flower　bud.　Yun　Mei　wanted　to　take　her　in　her　arms　as　she　had　when　Niu　Niu　was　only　two　or　three　months　old.　She　wanted　Niu　Niu　to　suck　her　breasts　again　while　she　fondled　Niu　Niu's　little　hands　and　feet.

But　Niu　Niu　was　always　with　her　grandmother.　These　two　—　the　old　one　and　the　young　one　—　were　always　together，　like　a　body　and　its　shadow.　The　grandmother's　life　seemed　to　have　no　other　use　but　to　care　for　and　comfort　Niu　Niu.　Yun　Mei　could　not　take　Niu　Niu　from　her　mother-in-law.　Sometimes　Yun　Mei　was　almost　jealous　and　wanted　to　snatch　Niu　Niu　from　Mrs.　Tien　Yiu，　but　she　did　not　do　it.　She　knew　that　her　mother-in-law　had　had　no　daughters;　Niu　Niu　was　her　granddaughter　and　also　her　daughter.　And　so　Yun　Mei　would　comfort　her　mother-in-law　and　say，　“There　is　nothing　much　wrong　with　Niu　Niu.　She　has　no　serious　illness.”　It　was　as　though　Niu　Niu　were　not　her　daughter，　but　only　the　granddaughter　of　her　mother-in-law.

While　this　little　life　was　flickering　between　life　and　death，　Rey　Shuan　received　fron　Old　Three　so　much　good　news　that　he　could　not　use　it　all.　The　American　Third　Fleet　was　attacking　Tokyo　Bay.　Russia，　America，　and　England　had　made　the　Potsdam　agreement.　The　first　atom　bomb　had　been　dropped　on　Hiroshima.

The　weather　was　hot.　Rey　Shuan　sweated　day　and　night　to　select　and　edit，　to　get　and　send　away　the　manuscripts.　He　still　pretended　to　be　calm，　but　his　eyes　shone　and　his　heart　beat　fast.　He　forgot　the　weakness　of　his　body　and　felt　that　he　had　limitless　energy，　and　refused　to　be　idle　a　moment.　He　wanted　to　sing　to　celebrate　the　ending　of　the　greatest　tragedy　of　humankind.

Besides　reporting　the　messages　of　victory　he　wanted　to　write　his　hopes　for　the　future　world.　He　hoped　that　no　one　—　after　this　greatest　of　all　lessons　taught　in　blood—would　again　try　to　solve　problems　by　force.　But　he　did　not　write　out　these　ideas.　His　underground　paper　was　too　small　for　writing　of　this　kind.

But　he　told　his　hopes　to　the　students　in　the　classroom.　He　saw　mankind　as　slaves　of　weapons.　He　looked　down　on　them　because　they　were　slaves.　But　he　also　felt　happy　that　mankind　could　be　soft　and　could，　after　war，　make　peace.　If　mankind　could　be　disarmed，　and　no　longer　be　slaves　of　weapons，　there　would　be　hope　for　peace.

But　when　he　looked　at　Niu　Niu　his　heart　turned　cold.　Niu　Niu　did　not　allow　him　to　have　any　hope　for　tomorrow.　In　his　heart　he　prayed，　“Victory　is　before　us.　Niu　Niu，　you　mustn't　die！　Live　another　half　year，　another　month，　perhaps　only　ten　days　—　Little　Niu　Niu，　you　will　see　peace.”

His　prayer　had　not　the　slightest　effect.　Victory　could　not　save　Niu　Niu.　Victory　was　only　the　ending　of　the　war，　and　could　not　bring　those　who　had　died　to　life，　or　keep　those　severely　wounded　from　dying.

When　Niu　Niu　had　no　way　but　to　eat　a　mouthful　of　Republic　flour　she　always　washed　it　down　with　water　or　soup.　The　sand　and　the　husks　in　the　flour　accumulated　in　her　appendix.　She　had　acute　appendicitis.

A　spasm　of　pain　—　as　if　the　pain　of　the　eight　long　years　of　war　had　all　concentrated　in　one　place　—　made　her　curl　up　into　a　ball.　Cold　sweat　came　out　over　her　whole　body　so　that　her　old　worn　coat　and　trousers　were　wet　through.　She　screamed　shrilly　a　couple　of　times.　Her　lips　turned　blue　and　her　eyeballs　rolled　upward.

The　whole　family　were　around　her，　and　no　one　knew　what　to　do.　Just　as　in　the　war，　they　could　think　of　no　good　way　to　act.

Seeing　Niu　Niu　motionless　Old　Man　Chi　called　loudly，　“Niu　Niu，　dear　one，　wake　up，　Niu　Niu，　wake　up.”

Niu　Niu's　two　thin　legs，　as　thin　as　kaoliang　stalks，　stretched　out.　Mrs.　Tien　Yiu　and　Yun　Mei　both　rushed　to　take　her　up，　but　Yun　Mei　let　the　grandmother　take　the　child.　Mrs.　Tien　Yiu　held　her　granddaughter　and　called　softly，　“Niu　Niu，　Niu　Niu.”　Little　Niu　Niu　had　no　strength　left　and　lay　gasping　for　breath.

“I'll　go　for　a　doctor.”　As　if　suddenly　waking　from　a　dream　Rey　Shuan　rushed　out　of　the　room.

There　was　another　spasm　of　pain　and　Little　Niu　Niu　writhed　in　her　grandmother's　arms　with　all　the　strength　she　had　left.　Mrs.　Tien　Yiu　could　not　hold　her　and　let　her　down　again　on　the　bed.

Niu　Niu's　little　undernourished　body　could　not　resist　the　evil　within.　She　writhed　a　few　times，　her　eyes　rolled　up，　and　she　did　not　move　again.

Mrs.　Tien　Yiu　placed　her　hand　on　Niu　Niu's　lips.　There　was　no　breath.　Niu　Niu　did　not　open　her　eyes　to　look　at　her　grandmother，　did　not　call，　“Mother，”　in　her　sweet　voice.

Mrs.　Tien　Yiu's　whole　body　was　covered　with　cold　sweat.　Her　hand　was　still　stretched　out，　and　she　could　neither　move　nor　weep.　She　stood　before　the　little　bed　in　a　daze　and　her　mind　was　blank.　This　great　sorrow　had　made　her　forget　how　to　weep.

Seeing　that　Niu　Niu　did　not　move　Yun　Mei　fell　over　her　little　daughter's　body，　embracing　that　motionless　form　still　wet　from　tears　and　sweat.　She　also　forgot　how　to　weep　and　could　only　put　her　mouth　on　little　Niu　Niu's　chest　and　call　wildly，　“Niu　Niu，　my　flesh，　my　Niu　Niu.”　Little　Precious　wept　aloud.

Old　Man　Chi，　shaking　and　groping，　sat　on　a　chair　and　hung　his　head.　In　the　room　there　was　only　the　sound　of　Yun　Mei's　cries　and　the　weeping　of　Little　Precious.

The　old　man　sat　with　his　head　hanging　for　a　long　time，　and　then　he　suddenly　stood　up.　Slowly　but　with　determination　he　walked　toward　the　little　bed.　He　took　hold　of　Yun　Mei's　shoulder　and　tried　to　pull　her　away.

Yun　Mei　held　Niu　Niu　all　the　tighter.　Niu　Niu　had　been　born　of　her，　and　now　it　seemed　as　if　she　wanted　again　to　be　one　body　with　her　little　daughter.

Old　Man　Chi，　half-angry　and　half-pleading，　said，　“Get　away，　get　away.”

Yun　Mei　heard　her　grandfather's　voice　and　cried　wildly，　“What　do　you　want？”

The　old　man　pulled　again　and　Yun　Mei　sat　on　the　ground.　The　old　man　picked　up　Little　Niu　Niu，　and　calling，　“Niu　Niu，”　he　walked　toward　the　door.　“Niu　Niu，　come　with　your　great-grand-father.”　Niu　Niu's　only　answer　was　the　slight　movement　of　her　legs　as　they　swung.

Staggering，　the　old　man　carried　Niu　Niu　into　the　courtyard.　Sweat　ran　from　his　forehead.　Only　one　or　two　of　the　buttons　on　his　short　coat　were　fastened　so　a　piece　of　his　hard　dry　chest　showed.　He　stood　still　below　the　steps.　He　was　gasping　as　if　he　were　afraid　he　would　forget　what　he　was　to　do.　He　held　Niu　Niu　more　tightly　and　still　called　in　a　low　voice，　“Niu　Niu，　come　with　me，　come.”

The　old　man's　low　calls　brought　Mrs.　Tien　Yiu　out.　She　looked　straight　ahead　and　moving　rigidly　followed　the　old　man　like　an　automaton，　as　if　the　old　man　were　not　calling　Niu　Niu　but　calling　her.

By　this　time　Yun　Mei's　cries　and　the　weeping　of　Little　Precious　had　brought　quite　a　few　of　the　neighbors.

John　Ting　because　of　his　position　as　Head　of　the　Li　stood　in　front　of　the　group.　His　expression　showed　that　if　there　were　anything　to　be　said　he　must　be　the　one　to　say　it.

Fourth　Mistress　Li　was　now　almost　blind，　but　her　warmhearted　helpfulness　and　sincerity　were　as　in　the　old　days.　Walking　with　a　stick　she　still　busied　herself　helping　others，　as　if　after　the　“Old　Thing”　had　died　she　must　alone　be　responsibe　for　helping　the　neighbors.

Cheng　Chang　Shun，　with　Little　Victory　in　his　arms，　stood　behind　Fourth　Mistress　Li.　He　was　now　like　a　middle-aged　man，　but　Little　Victory　was　a　handsome　boy，　though　not　very　plump.

Old　Widow　Ma　had　not　come　in.　Although　she　was　greatly　concerned　that　such　weeping　should　come　from　the　Chi　home，　she　stood　outside　the　gate　and　waited　patiently　for　Chang　Shun　to　come　and　tell　her　everything.

The　storyteller　Fang　the　Sixth　and　many　others　stood　silently　in　the　courtyard.

Old　Man　Chi　walked　with　determination　but　still　he　walked　very　slowly.　To　keep　from　falling　his　feet　thrust　to　the　left　and　to　the　right　and　so　he　could　not　walk　quickly.

Rey　Shuan　with　the　doctor　rushed　into　the　courtyard.　When　he　had　rounded　the　spirit　screen　and　saw　the　neighbors　in　the　courtyard　he　pushed　through　them　and　came　face　to　face　with　his　grandfather.

The　doctor　came　over　and　took　hold　of　Niu　Niu's　wrist　which　was　already　stiffening.

Old　Man　Chi　suddenly　stood　still　and　lifted　his　head.　He　saw　the　doctor.　“What　do　you　want？”　he　shouted　angrily.

The　doctor　paid　no　attention　to　the　old　man's　anger　but　said　quietly　to　Rey　Shuan，　“The　child　is　dead.”

Rey　Shuan　did　not　seem　to　hear　the　doctor　but　with　tears　in　his　eyes　went　over　and　took　his　grandfather's　arm.　The　doctor　went　away.

“Grandfather，　where　are　you　taking　Niu　Niu？　She　is　already—　”　The　word　“dead”　seemed　to　stick　in　Rey　Shuan's　throat.

“Stand　aside！”　The　old　man's　legs　could　scarcely　move　but　he　still　wanted　to　go　forward.　“I　am　going　to　let　the　Japanese　devils　in　house　Number　Three　see　this.　They　took　away　our　grain.　Their　children　have　grain　to　eat，　but　they　have　starved　my　great-grand-daughter.　I　am　going　to　show　them.　Stand　aside！”





