The　Spear　That　Demolishes　Five　Tigers　at　Once


Characters

LWang　Ta-ch'eng　—over　30,　a　Northerner,　very　tall,　broad　back　big　eyes　and　bushy　eyebrows.　An　expert　on　Chinese　boxing　but　being　modest　seldom　shows　up,　that　is　why　he　moves　slowly　so　that　no　people　will　discover　that　he　is　an　expert.　Very　proud　man　but　tries　to　hide　that　fact.　Always　courteous,　well　mannered.　In　spite　of　his　young　age,　he　is　a　very　famous　and　self　supporting　piao　shih.

Mrs.　Wang　the　wife　—a　bit　younger　than　her　husband,　very　small,not　good　looking　but　rather　just　ordinary,　tidy,　a　simple　woman　of　the　North.　As　a　compensation　for　her　ordinariness　she　has　a　quick　temper,　she　even　sometimes　challenges　her　husband.　She　is　not　nagging　without　a　reason　but　she　always　stands　up　on　her　dignity　and　rights　as　a　housewife.

Ting　Te-sheng　—man,　over　20,the　first　pupil　that　Wang　Ta-ch'eng　had,　very　tall　and　strong,　simple　and　straightforward.　Respects　Mr.　Wang　and　puts　him　on　a　pedestal,　not　too　bright　and　although　very　powerful　physically　he　cannot　command　his　muscles　as　well　as　his　teacher.

Li　Chan-yuan　—man,　about　20,　second　pupil　of　Wang　Ta-ch'eng.Very　broad　and　not　tall　as　Ting　Te-sheng,　very　strong,　he　is　much　more　intelligent　than　Ting　Te-sheng　he　takes　advantage　of　people　and　opportunities,　and　has　a　tendency　of　being　a　bit　smart　already.

Wang　Shih-mei　—a　girl　about　10,　much　loved　daughter　of　Wang　Ta-ch'eng.　Her　parents　call　her　Niu-niu.　She　is　well　built　and　very　pretty.　She　took　boxing　lessons　when　she　was　very　small.　She　has　fits　of　bad　temper　but　she　does　not　want　to　be　rude　to　people　on　purpose.

Ch'en　Hsiang-wu　—a　few　years　older　than　Wang　Ta-ch'eng,　also　a　famous　boxer,　he　is　short　and　his　head　is　very　small,　but　his　skill　in　boxing　is　better　than　anyone　would　suspect　at　first.　He　loved　boxing　so　much　that　he　was　always　visiting　old　famous　boxers　in　order　to　learn　from　them　more　and　more　about　boxing.　Although　his　movements　are　slow　and　seemingly　lazy,　but　as　soon　as　he　starts　practising　boxing　he　is　so　energetic　and　like　quick　silver　that　he　almost　resembles　a　monkey.

Sung　Ming-liang　—man,　about　26,　an　educated.　Close　neighbor　and　good　friend　of　Wang　Ta-ch'eng's,　and　is　much　respected　by　the　famous　Wang.　He　is　not　strong　physically　but　he　is　intelligent　and　far-seeing.　Although　his　appearance　is　sometimes　melancholy　his　heart　is　always　on　fire.

Little　K'an　—man,about　20,　very　strong　and　very　bold.　He　knows　no　limits,　at　first　he　was　a　bandit　and　later　he　was　a　secret　policeman.

Fourth　Dog　—co-worker　of　Little　K'an,　physically　very　strong　but　not　brave,　a　good　for　nothing　individual.

Hired　boxers　for　Mr.　Wang　—a　group,　they　help　Wang　Ta-ch'eng　when　he　has　something　for　them　to　do.

By-standers　—several,　women,　children,　men.





