Chapter　Twenty-Three


GERMANY　SURRENDERED　unconditionally.

Peiping's　newspapers　dared　not　discuss　the　reasons　for　the　surrender　but　tried　to　divert　attention　by　saying　that　the　Imperial　Army　of　Japan　would　fight　to　the　end，and　that　even　if　the　allied　forces　should　invade　the　homeland，Japan　could　not　be　conquered.The　“sacred　war”discussed　in　this　way　seemed　somewhat　shopworn.

The　Japanese　living　in　Peiping　worked　all　the　harder　to　make　friends　with　the　Chinese，and　now　it　was　not　on　instructions　from　their　officials　but　on　their　own　initiative.Some　Japanese　even　went　so　far　as　to　become　sworn　brothers　with　Chinese，or　acknowledged　old　ladies　in　Peiping　as　their　“sworn　mothers.”

During　this　period　the　Japanese　Army　had　to　show　its　leniency　by　letting　go　a　few　prisoners　who　were　not　yet　quite　dead.They　also　selected　a　few　young　Chinese　from　the　prisons　whose　bones　were　not　yet　broken　and　told　them　to　write　confessions，and　then　sent　them　into　the　interior　to　seek　the　news　of　peace　and　to　spread　rumors　of　peace.“The　Japanese　military　love　peace.How　wonderful　it　would　be　if　now　China　and　Japan　should　make　peace　and　together　fight　against　England　and　America.”

Except　for　the　Japanese　the　busiest　were　the　traitors.Their　greatest　talent　was　to　turn　the　rudder　when　the　wind　changed.Even　the　surrender　of　Germany　meant　they　must　do　something.Some　of　them　quickly　announced　that　they　had　divorced　their　wives　so　that　even　if　they　themselves　could　not　escape　the　most　severe　punishment，their　wives　and　children　could　still　have　their　property.Some　of　them　sent　their　children　secretly　to　the　interior，hoping　they　could　keep　a　foot　in　each　boat　and　lessen　their　guilt　in　selling　their　country.Some　of　them　sent　close　friends　or　relatives　to　the　interior　to　join　the　Chinese，to　make　it　seem　that　their　surrender　to　the　enemy　had　really　been　underground　work　for　the　Chinese.

Even　in　the　Little　Sheep　Fold，Commissioner　of　Education　Niu　—　who　lived　in　the　house　with　the　four　willow　trees　outside　the　gate　and　had　never　admitted　that　he　was　a　traitor　—　could　no　longer　remain　calm.He　could　no　longer　be　absorbed　in　his　collection　of　books　and　scientific　equipment　but　tried　to　slip　secretly　away　from　Peiping.He　got　only　as　far　as　the　Chien　Men　Station　and　was　caught　by　the　Japanese　and　put　in　prison.

On　the　wave　of　leniency　the　storyteller，Fang　the　Sixth，with　the　black　mole　on　his　face，was　freed　from　prison.

The　people　of　the　Little　Sheep　Fold　were　more　interested　in　the　release　of　Fang　the　Sixth　than　they　were　in　the　arrest　of　Commissioner　Niu.They　surrounded　Fang　the　Sixth　like　a　swarm　of　bees　and　comforted　him.Although　when　he　was　arrested　they　had　not　had　the　courage　to　sign　their　names　to　get　him　out，since　he　was　out　they　could　not　be　cold　to　him.

Fang　the　Sixth　was　no　longer　the　Fang　the　Sixth　they　had　known.He　would　no　longer　tell　funny　stories　at　any　moment.He　had　been　in　prison;　he　had　seen　death　and　torture.

He　soon　began　telling　stories　again　to　earn　his　living，but　he　went　with　his　head　hanging　and　he　came　home　the　same　way.He　could　not　go　back　to　the　broadcasting　station，and　the　tea　shops　would　not　engage　him　as　they　had　done　before.He　could　only　go　to　the　amusement　park　at　the　Bridge　of　Heaven，and　to　the　temple　fairs　in　the　east　and　west　cities，to　tell　his　stories　in　the　open　air　and　earn　a　few　coppers.

Whether　it　was　at　the　Bridge　of　Heaven　or　elsewhere，he　would　frequently　use　the　most　poisonous　words　to　reveal　his　hatred.He　not　only　made　his　audience　laugh，but　he　would　also　take　the　opportunity　to　speak　in　irony　and　sarcasm　about　current　events，and　so　stimulate　the　patriotism　of　the　audience.

The　audiences　were　able　to　catch　his　inferences　and　innuendoes，so　when　he　told　his　stories　he　was　always　surrounded　by　so　thick　a　crowd　that　even　the　wind　could　not　get　through.They　all　liked　to　hear　the　jests　and　stories　that　had　strength　and　sinews　and　could　carry　their　hatred.

He　even　went　to　Rey　Shuan　to　ask　him　to　explain　the　new　terms　in　the　papers，and　the　news　which　he　could　not　understand.

Rey　Shuan　was　pleased　to　be　a　volunteer　teacher　but　he　warned　Fang　the　Sixth　not　to　come　too　often，and　that　it　would　be　better　to　meet　in　the　streets　where　they　could　use　the　time　while　Rey　Shuan　went　to　school　or　came　back，and　talk　on　the　way.Since　Rey　Shuan　had　taken　Mr.Chien's　place　as　editor　of　the　underground　paper　he　had　to　be　very　careful.If　Fang　the　Sixth　came　to　see　him　and　John　Ting　should　see　them，there　would　very　likely　be　trouble.

If　Rey　Shuan　liked　Fang　the　Sixth，he　despised　John　Ting.When　John　Ting　heard　that　Germany　had　surrendered　he　began　to　come　often　to　see　Rey　Shuan.Rey　Shuan　was　most　fearful　that　John　Ting　should　see　his　manuscripts，but　he　dared　not　refuse　to　see　him，and　say　that　he　was　busy.

John　Ting　thought　that　Germany　had　been　defeated　by　England　alone.He　did　not　know　much　about　world　affairs，but　he　always　had　his　own　point　of　view　about　the　international　situation.

Next　to　England，John　Ting　most　admired　Germany.German　bicycles　and　chemical　dyes　were　perhaps　the　main　reasons　for　his　admiration　of　Germany.In　his　conversation　he　liked　to　say，“Outside　of　English　goods　one　must　count　the　German　brands　as　the　best.”　This　kind　of　speech　was　to　show　that　he　understood　world　affairs.Before　the　word　Germany　he　always　put　the　word　“old”　as　though　he　and　Germany　were　old　neighbors.

He　must　try　to　be　friendly　with　Rey　Shuan.All　his　goods　and　chattels！Suppose　the　English　Palace　opened　its　doors　again　one　day，and　Rey　Shuan　should　tell　them　that　John　Ting　had　had　dealings　with　the　Japanese　—　could　he　endure　that？

He　talked　with　Rey　Shuan　about　how　much　more　powerful　England　was　than　Germany.He　would　also　ask　Rey　Shuan's　advice：　“Suppose　Japan　is　also　defeated，should　we　not　kill　all　the　Japanese　in　Peiping？”

Rey　Shuan　could　not　make　any　answer，and　wished　only　that　he　could　kick　John　Ting　out　with　one　swift　kick.

When　Rey　Shuan　did　not　answer　John　Ting　thought　that　what　he　had　said　was　right，and　quickly　added，“In　our　Little　Sheep　Fold，I　am　Head　of　the　Li，so　wait　and　see.It　would　be　strange　if　I　did　not　show　the　people　in　house　Number　One　and　Number　Three.Mr.Chi，you　are　my　witness　to　prove　that　from　the　beginning　to　the　end　I　have　always　been　a　man　of　the　English　Palace.When　Mr.Goodrich　comes　back　I　can　go　again　and　serve　the　old　gentleman.Am　I　not　right？”

Rey　Shuan　knew　that　if　he　should　say　“Yes，”　John　Ting　would　immediately　bow　and　ask　Rey　Shuan　to　be　kind　to　him，as　though　whether　he　could　get　back　to　the　English　Palace　or　not　depended　on　Rey　Shuan's　words.If　he　should　say　“No，”　John　Ting　would　certainly　ask　for　detailed　explanations，and　he　had　no　time　to　waste　words　with　this　running　dog.

Cheng　Chang　Shun　brought　Rey　Shuan　a　piece　of　news.Chang　Shun　told　him　that　recently　the　Japanese　had　begun　to　sell　things.Chang　Shun　himself　had　not　bought　anything　from　them　because　he　was　unwilling　to　trade　with　the　Japanese，but　he　had　been　stopped　by　them，and　had　seen　others　of　his　profession　buying　from　them.“Mr.Chi，judging　from　this　it　would　seem　that　the　Japanese　are　really　going　to　be　defeated.　They　are　selling　their　odds　and　ends　to　get　a　bit　of　money　for　returning　to　their　homes.”

Rey　Shuan　could　not　but　admit　that　Chang　Shun　was　right.

“Mr.　Chi，　have　you　noticed　that　from　the　time　Germany　surrendered，”　Chang　Shun's　nasal　tones　said，　“the　Japanese　have　changed　their　manner？　They　now　bow　to　us　and　smile　at　us.　And　see，the　people　of　house　Number　Three　always　have　their　gate　closed　as　if　they　were　afraid　that　someone　might　go　in　and　kill　them.”

One　day　Rey　Shuan　received　an　unexpected　letter.　Although　the　letter　was　signed　with　a　false　signature　he　saw　at　a　glance　that　it　was　Old　Three's　writing.　He　wondered　how　Old　Three　dared　to　send　a　letter　in　this　way　to　his　home.　Old　Three's　letters　had　always　been　sent　through　some　secret　channel　and　had　never　come　through　the　post　office.

After　he　had　read　a　few　sentences　he　began　to　feel　easy.　A　letter　such　as　this　could　not　make　any　trouble　even　if　it　were　seen　by　the　censors.

“I　have　seen　our　fat　sister-in-law　at　the　Drowned　Horse　Lake.　Her　goods　have　all　been　confiscated　and　she　can　do　nothing　but　sell　her　fat　flesh.　There　are　running　sores　between　her　fingers.　I　do　not　pity　her　and　I　do　not　revile　her.　She　will　very　likely　rot　there.”

Rey　Shuan　could　guess　that　the　fat　sister-in-law　must　be　Fat　Chrysanthemum，and　althoughh　he　did　not　know　where　the　Drowned　Horse　Lake　was，he　could　guess　from　between　the　lines　that　it　could　not　be　a　respectable　place.　He　went　to　ask　Fang　the　Sixth.　Fang　the　Sixth　told　him　that　it　was　the　main　district　in　Tientsin　for　the　lowest　houses　of　prostitution.

While　the　Japanese　in　Peiping　were　busying　themselves　to　secure　adopted　mothers　and　to　sell　their　possessions，　the　Chinese　in　Japan　were　seeking　every　means　to　get　back　to　China.　The　home-land　of　Japan　was　suffering　from　severe　air　raids.　And　they　—　whether　traitors　or　students　—　were　not　willing　to　lose　their　lives　and　money　in　Japan.　Seeing　the　bombs　they　remembered　their　own　homeland.

In　Peiping，those　who　had　thought　of　going　to　Japan　now　all　feared　that　they　might　be　sent　to　Japan　to　attend　meetings　or　on　business.　They　thought　of　all　means　to　avoid　being　sent.　Their　lives　were　more　important　than　anything　else.　They　could　not　go　to　places　where　bombs　fell　like　rain.

Lan　the　Eastern　Sun　only　was　still　fired　with　the　idea　of　going　to　Japan.　He　had　been　ill　for　a　long　time.　While　ill　a　Japanese　doctor　and　nurse　had　watched　him　constantly.　The　Japanese　doctor，under　orders　from　the　Japanese　militarists，　could　let　him　live　or　die　as　they　commanded.　If，　while　delirious，　Eastern　Sun　had　said　a　word　or　two　that　showed　he　was　not　satisfied　with　the　Japanese，　the　doctor　could　have　given　him　poison　and　let　his　eyes　roll　up　and　never　come　down　again.　But　Eastern　Sun，　even　when　delirious，still　shouted，　“Ten　thousand　years　to　the　Heavenly　Emperor　！”　This　not　only　touched　the　hearts　of　the　doctor　and　the　nurse，　but　caused　them　also　to　make　a　good　report　and　to　praise　him　as　a　Chinese　most　loyal　to　the　Emperor.　They　nursed　him　carefully　and　did　everything　they　could　to　cure　him.　They　took　X-rays　of　his　whole　body　and　sent　the　plates　to　Japan　to　be　the　material　for　scientific　investigation，　to　see　what　special　structures　there　were　in　his　heart，　brain，liver，and　lungs，that　could　make　him　so　faithful　to　Japan.

Eastern　Sun　was　still　afraid　that　Rey　Tang's　bullet　would　fly　into　his　heart.　Having　recovered　from　his　illness　he　wanted　to　go　to　Japan　and　be　out　of　danger　of　Rey　Tang's　threats.

Because　of　his　illness　his　position　as　Department　Head　in　the　New　People's　League　had　been　given　to　someone　else.　This　did　not　make　him　unhappy　because　the　Japanese　doctor　and　nurse　had　both　told　him　that　if　he　went　to　Japan　he　would　be　given　an　even　higher　position.　He　believed　what　they　told　him.

Because　of　Commissioner　Niu's　arrest，the　position　of　Commissioner　of　Education　was　vacant.　The　Japanese　began　to　think　of　Lan　the　Eastern　Sun.　He　was　their　loyal　servant　and　faithful　dog.　His　good　work　was　on　record　and　they　could　trust　him　absolutely.

Yes，　Eastern　Sun　would　be　glad　to　be　the　Commissioner　of　Education，but　he　must　first　go　to　Japan　in　the　name　of　investigating　Japanese　education.　Suppose　while　he　was　in　Japan，　Rey　Tang　were　caught　and　killed　—　could　he　not　then　come　back　in　peace　to　be　the　Commissioner　of　Education？　Moreover，　who　knew，　he　might　in　Japan　marry　a　Japanese　wife.　Would　he　not　then　be　a　Prince　Consort　to　Japan？

Lan　the　Eastern　Sun　went　to　Japan.

Those　who　had　planned　to　see　him　off　were　disappointed，　because　he　had　disguised　himself，　and　protected　by　two　secret　police，　had　quietly　and　in　the　night　left　Peiping.　He　had　been　afraid　to　go　to　the　station　and　have　a　fuss　made　over　him　—　that　would　certainly　have　attracted　Rey　Tang，　who　might　have　shot　him.

Those　who　had　prepared　gifts　for　him，　to　see　him　off，　sighed　after　he　had　left，　and　said　to　each　other，　“That　man　Lan　will　do，　after　all.　Japan　is　bombed　every　day　and　yet　he　dares　to　go.　That　is　what　I　call　being　a　good　Son　of　Han.　Hum　—　look　at　us　—　we　want　to　eat　but　are　afraid　of　the　heat　of　the　stove！　We　will　never　get　anywhere.”　But　it　did　not　enter　their　minds　that　Eastern　Sun　could　go　to　Japan　and　never　come　back.　Not　even　a　splinter　of　his　bones　was　ever　found.

Lan　the　Eastern　Sun　and　the　five-thousand-year-old　culture　of　his　race　had　no　connection　whatsoever.　His　cunning　and　ruthlessness　were　still　barbarous.　He　belonged　to　the　ages　of　man　eat　man，　dog　eat　dog.　When　he　met　the　war，the　war　started　by　the　Japanese　war　lords，　his　dog-eat-dog　philosophy　fitted　exactly　with　that　of　the　Japanese　war　lords，　so　he　was　able　to　push　up　to　high　position，　and　with　them　use　the　language　of　men　and　the　bodies　of　men　to　display　the　ruthlessness　and　cunning　of　beasts.

What　kind　of　world　there　should　be　he　had　never　thought.　He　was　a　fly　—　knowing　only　his　own　satisfaction　when　he　had　sucked　a　drop　of　blood　or　eaten　a　piece　of　manure.　The　world　had　nothing　to　do　with　him.　If　only　he　had　a　piece　of　offal　to　eat　the　world　was　a　beautiful　world.　He　had　never　considered　a　world　without　firearms，　bombs，　and　war;　and　so　he　had　never　thought　whether　the　world　should　have　firearms，　bombs，　and　war.

Science　had　reached　beyond　all　other　realms　of　human　thought　and　had　invented　the　atom　bomb.　Just　as　blundering　and　stupid　as　the　Japanese　who　had　never　thought　what　the　world　should　be，　just　as　blundering　and　stupid　as　Eastern　Sun's　barbarous　cunning　and　ruthlessness，　was　the　creation　of　the　atom　bomb　by　those　who　had　never　thought　what　the　world　should　be.　That　atomic　energy　was　first　used　for　war　is　the　greatest　shame　of　the　human　race.　It　was　in　this　shame　to　the　human　race　that　Lan　the　Eastern　Sun　met　a　weapon　of　death　more　cunning　and　ruthless　than　he.　He　did　not　see　the　beginning　of　the　new　age，　but　succeeded　only　in　scattering　his　bones　in　the　old　age　—　the　age　of　man　eat　man，　and　dog　eat　dog.





