Chapter　Twenty-one


JTALY　SURRENDERED　and　in　the　Pacific　the　Imperial　Japanese　Navy　retreated　from　point　to　point.The　Japanese　in　Peiping　were　each　ordered　to　make　ten　Chinese　friends.

The　Japanese　in　house　Number　Three　of　the　Little　Sheep　Fold，like　the　other　Japanese　of　Peiping，began　to　come　out　to　make　“friends.”　In　the　past　they　and　their　Chinese　neighbors　had　had　no　social　intercourse，but　now　even　the　expressions　on　their　faces　must　be　changed　according　to　order.

Fourth　Mistress　Li　was　the　first　to　reject　their　friendship.She　loved　everybody　but　she　could　not　love　the　people　who　had　kicked　her　old　mate　to　death.Although　she　knew　that　those　who　had　kicked　her　old　mate　to　death　were　not　the　people　from　Number　Three，still　Japanese　were　after　all　Japanese　—　and　she　was　not　willing　to　distinguish　too　clearly　between　them？

The　old　widow's　mouth　was　not　at　all　what　a　widow's　should　be.She　used　all　the　vile　words　she　knew.The　Japanese　did　not　know　the　dictionary　in　which　her　words　could　be　found　and　could　only　listen　with　smiles.They　thought　she　was　speaking　nicely　to　them.They　had　come　to　make　friends　with　her　—　how　could　she　be　reviling　them？

Cheng　Chang　Shun　almost　quarreled　with　his　grandmother.Old　Widow　Ma，holding　to　her　philosophy　of　amiability，wanted　to　receive　the　Japanese　and　not　offend　them.She　knew　they　were　to　be　feared　and　hated，but　since　they　had　come　to　her　she　felt　that　at　least　she　should　give　them　a　cup　of　tea　and　should　not　absolutely　drive　them　away.

Chang　Shun　decided　to　lock　the　gate　from　the　inside.He　could　not　receive　“friends”　of　that　kind.

In　the　Little　Sheep　Fold　everyone　felt　that　this　business　of　killing　people　and　then　making　friends　was　a　jest，and　a　hateful　one.　Without　consultation　and　as　one　man，they　paid　no　attention　to　the　Japanese.

John　Ting　was　the　only　exception.

In　the　past　when　he　had　been　working　in　the　English　Palace，John　Ting　had　despised　the　Japanese　more　than　anyone.Now　he　had　had　no　work　for　a　long　time　and　his　hope　of　going　back　to　the　English　Palace　faded　more　and　more.He　had　to　have　a　foreign　master　for　his　heart　to　be　at　peace.He　had　become　accustomed　to　being　a　slave　to　the　foreigners.

After　he　became　Head　of　the　Li　he　had　been　able　to　play　some　tricks　and　had　obtained　some　coal.This　coal　made　it　possible　for　him　to　have　some　income　every　day.He　had　built　a　small　stove　in　his　courtyard　and　begun　to　sell　fire.The　neighbors　who　had　no　coal　to　make　a　fire　could　come　to　him　and　boil　their　tea　water　or　cook　their　food.He　watched　the　big　clock　and　charged　according　to　the　time.

The　Japanese　in　Number　Three　could　not　understand　why　the　Chinese　were　so　unfeeling　and　unreasonable　as　not　to　be　friendly　with　them.Only　when　John　Ting　repaid　their　call　did　they　begin　to　feel　happy.They　had　feared　that　if　they　did　not　make　a　single　friend　they　would　be　punished.They　were　thinking　of　going　to　house　Number　One　to　ask　the　old　lady　there　how　she　had　become　so　friendly　with　all　the　neighbors，and　if　the　old　lady　would　not　tell　them　they　would　threaten　her，and　perhaps　make　up　accusations　and　secretly　harm　her.Fortunately　John　Ting，Head　of　the　Little　Sheep　Fold　Li，was　willing　to　make　friends　with　them.They　must　hold　him　tightly　in　the　way　they　invaded　others'　countries　—　first　to　hold　one　place　and　then　gradually　move　forward　like　silk　worms　eating　mulberry　leaves.

John　Ting，like　other　foreign　slaves，wanted　there　to　be　still　more　foreign　slaves　so　that　he　could　be　their　prophet　and　leader.He　boasted　to　the　Japanese　in　house　Number　Three，“I　am　Head　of　the　Li，I　can　give　orders　for　them　all　to　be　your　friends.”　When　he　came　out　of　house　Number　Three，John　Ting's　back　was　straight　again，and　he　had　almost　the　air　he　had　had　when　in　the　English　Palace.

He　went　to　find　Sergeant　Pai.He　practically　ordered　Sergeant　Pai　to　help　him　notify　the　neighbors　that　they　must　show　good　feeling　toward　the　Japanese.

Sergeant　Pai　was　a　practical　man，but　practical　according　to　reason　and　according　to　the　right　emotions.He　never　lost　his　head　and　he　was　able　to　take　advantage　of　an　opportunity，but　he　would　not　because　of　this　lose　his　love　for　his　country　and　for　his　own　people.He　die　not　agree　with　John　Ting.

“Just　one　word　is　enough，”he　said　to　John　Ting.“If　the　Japanese　want　to　make　friends　with　us，is　it　not　the　same　as　the　weasel　taking　New　Year's　Greetings　to　the　chicken？”

John　Ting　was　annoyed.He　was　the　child　of　the　national　humiliation　of　the　last　hundred　years.The　air　he　breathed　was　that　of　the　national　shame.His　highest　ideal　was　to　beg　the　foreigners　to　lift　their　honorable　hands　and　not　to　strike　him，but　to　let　him　lead　his　life　as　a　foreign　slave.According　to　what　he　thought，England　could　be　defeated　by　Japan　but　Japan　could　never　be　defeated　by　the　Chinese.Even　if　Japan　should　unfortunately　be　defeated，would　not　England　and　America　become　strong　again　and　again　be　his　masters？Never　could　the　Chinese　alone　get　their　backs　straight　and　walk　shoulder　to　shoulder　together　as　brothers　with　the　English　and　the　Americans.He　did　not　want　to　talk　any　more　with　Sergeant　Pai.

John　Ting　went　to　see　Rey　Shuan.Rey　Shuan　had　eaten　the　food　of　the　English　Palace　—　he　would　certainly　understand.

If　this　had　happened　some　time　before　Rey　Shuan　would　have　smiled　a　little　and　said　something　slightly　ironic　to　send　John　Ting　away.Now，however，he　decided　to　tell　John　Ting　in　detail　what　he　knew　about　the　world　situation，whether　John　Ting　understood　or　not，or　whether　he　wanted　to　hear　or　not.Rey　Shuan　must　take　every　opportunity　to　do　his　duty　in　spreading　his　propaganda.After　a　long　speech　he　said　to　John　Ting，“Sergeant　Pai　and　the　neighbors　are　right.It　is　your　thinking　that　is　wrong.”

John　Ting　chewed　the　cud　of　Rey　Shuan's　words　and　began　to　see　some　light.“Oh，I　understand　now.You　are　saying　that　America　and　England　will　certainly　be　victorious　and　that　you　and　I　will　go　back　again　to　work　in　the　English　Palace.That　will　be　wonderful，be　wonderful.”

Rey　Shuan　wanted　to　spit　in　John　Ting's　face　but　he　controlled　himself.“You　are　still　wrong.We　should　not　be　dependent　on　anyone.We　should　be　our　own　masters.”

John　Ting　said　no　more　but　very　politely　took　his　leave.He　could　not　understand　what　Rey　Shuan　meant.

He　went　again　to　see　the　people　in　house　Number　Three　and　told　them　that　Sergeant　Pai　was　unwilling　to　co-operate.He　had　no　desire　to　harm　Sergeant　Pai　behind　his　back　but　he　must　make　the　Japanese　understand　how　ardently　he　had　tried　to　get　friends　for　them.If　the　Japanese　should，unfortunately，hate　Sergeant　Pai　that　could　not　be　helped.

The　Japanese　immediately　hated　Sergeant　Pai.Their　hatred　came　more　quickly　than　friendly　love.

They　would　not　tell　the　high　Japanese　officials　about　this　small　matter　but　wrote　a　letter　to　Sergeant　Pai's　superiors，who　were　also　Chinese，and　accused　him　of　neglecting　his　duty.

Sergeant　Pai's　superiors　were　afraid　of　losing　their　jobs　and　starving　to　death.For　the　sake　of　their　own　rice　bowls　they　dared　not　protect　Sergeant　Pai.They　dismissed　him.

Sergeant　Pai's　best　years　had　passed.He　had　experience，ideas，and　the　affection　of　the　people，but　he　had　no　savings　and　no　prospects.All　his　life　he　had　used　all　he　had.Heng！If　he　had　had　only　cunning　and　deceit　and　had　had　no　kindness　of　heart，perhaps　in　these　years　of　tumult　and　disturbance　he　might　not　have　been　discharged.

Well，since　a　good　heart　and　good　conduct　could　not　save　him，why　not　take　up　his　hands　and　kill　and　burn？The　Japanese　were　those　who　killed　and　set　fires　and　they　had　become　the　masters　of　Peiping.He　decided　to　kill　John　Ting.Who　cared　whether　it　was　good　or　bad　to　kill？The　greatest　revelation　of　the　war　was　to　show　people　who　had　never　killed　before　how　to　kill.

On　second　thought　—　if　one　was　to　kill，why　not　kill　a　Japanese？

He　did　not　tell　his　family　that　he　had　been　discharged，but　stuck　the　kitchen　chopper　inside　his　coat，and　went　out.

He　went　toward　the　Little　Sheep　Fold.There　were　Japanese　on　every　street，but　without　thinking　and　from　habit，he　walked　toward　the　Little　Sheep　Fold.He　was　used　to　the　place，and　most　likely，those　who　had　informed　on　him　were　from　house　Number　Three.Well　—　they　would　do　for　a　start　to　try　out　his　kitchen　chopper.

His　long　face　was　deadly　pale；　beads　of　sweat　stood　out　on　his　forehead；　his　back　was　very　straight；　his　eyes　looked　straight　ahead　but　he　saw　nothing.He　was　no　longer　Sergeant　Pai；he　was　only　a　spirit　of　death，gloomy　and　cold　as　（a　life-demanding　ghost）　death，about　5　or　6　feet　tall.He　had　lost　his　past　and　his　future；he　had　lost　his　cunning　and　his　good　heart.He　had　lost　everything，and　thought　only　of　burying　his　chopper　in　flesh　and　then　to　pass　it　across　his　own　throat.

When　he　saw　the　spirit　screen　of　house　Number　Three　he　stood　still.It　was　as　though　he　had　suddenly　awakened.He　had　been　about　to　do　a　thing　that　was　entirely　contrary　to　the　ideals　of　his　whole　life.He　stood　in　a　daze.

Rey　Shuan　came　out　of　his　gate.

A　large　portion　of　Sergeant　Pai's　will　to　kill　evaporated　when　he　saw　Rey　Shuan.His　shoulders　sagged　and　his　hands　and　feet　began　to　tremble.

“What's　the　matter，Sergeant　Pai？”　Rey　Shuan　asked.

Sergeant　Pai's　hands　went　to　the　place　where　the　chopper　was　hidden　as　if　he　were　afraid　that　Rey　Shuan　would　search　him.

Rey　Shuan　saw　that　something　was　wrong.Taking　Sergeant　Pai's　arm　he　said，“Come　and　sit　with　me　awhile　in　my　house.”

Without　knowing　what　to　do　Sergeant　Pai　went　with　Rey　Shuan，but　when　he　had　crossed　the　threshold　he　seemed　to　forget　the　killing　of　people　and　returned　to　his　original　courteous　ways.“Mr.Chi，I　—　I　will　not　go　in.”　He　really　did　not　want　to　go　in　and　talk　with　Rey　Shuan.He　felt　that　to　kill　was　shameful，even　to　kill　a　Japanese　who　had　made　him　lose　his　job.

Rey　Shuan　saw　that　Sergeant　Pai　must　be　in　trouble.“If　you　don't　want　to　come　in，suppose　we　talk　here.”　He　closed　the　gate　of　the　compound.

Sergeant　Pai　not　only　regretted　that　he　had　wanted　to　kill，he　also　regretted　that　he　had　not　had　the　courage　to　kill.All　he　could　do　was　to　tell　what　was　in　his　heart，and　let　Rey　Shuan　be　the　judge.Very　quickly，and　without　leaving　out　any　details，he　told　Rey　Shuan　everything.

When　he　had　heard　the　story　Rey　Shuan　said　nothing　for　a　long　time.Sergeant　Pai's　story　and　his　psychology　were　the　same　as　Rey　Shuan's　and　that　of　many，many　Peiping　people.The　people　were　all　unwilling　to　be　conquered　by　the　Japanese，all　wanted　to　fight，yet　the　peacefulness　and　lawabidingness　assimilated　over　many　thousand　years　made　them　wish　to　do　things　but　unable　to　do　them.

Rey　Shuan　understood　what　was　in　Sergeant　Pai's　mind　so　he　wanted　to　encourage　him　not　to　kill　the　Japanese，but　to　join　the　group　and　do　underground　work.But　could　he　tell　Sergeant　Pai　about　Mr.Chien　and　Old　Three？He　must　be　careful　and　first　tell　about　himself　without　mentioning　Mr.Chien　and　Old　Three.

Rey　Shuan　spoke　with　hesitation　and　Sergeant　Pai　listened　carefully.After　a　while　Sergeant　Pai　interrupted，“Mr.Chi，what　you　have　to　say　—　say　out.I　am　not　one　to　be　a　running　dog　and　sell　my　friends.I　am　already　a　man　without　a　way　to　live.I　am　one　who　has　already　thought　of　killing　the　Japanese　and　then　myself.I　could　not　—　for　a　few　dollars　—　sell　my　friends.If　you　want　me　to　swear，I　will　swear.”

Rey　Shuan　was　satisfied　and　began　to　tell　the　truth.“Sergeant　Pai，the　two　of　us　should　certainly　be　able　to　do　more　than　Mr.Chien.If　Mr.Chien　can　do　so　much，could　not　the　two　of　us　accomplish　something？Shall　we　not　co-operate？I　know　that　you　have　no　income　and　no　way　to　live，but　what　I　can　share　with　you　I　will　certainly　share　with　you　—　that　goes　without　saying.Old　Three　also　will　perhaps　be　able　to　think　of　something　for　you.If　we　work　together　today，and　tomorrow　unfortunately　we　are　arrested，will　we　not　have　earned　good　names　for　ourselves，for　after　our　death？”

“Tell　me　what　shall　I　do　first？”Sergeant　Pai　asked　without　the　slightest　hesitation.

“It　has　been　quite　a　few　days　since　I　lost　contact　with　Old　Three　and　Mr.Chien.I　dare　not　go　to　the　little　temple.I　suspect　Wang　the　Third.He　came　suddenly　to　see　me　the　other　day.If　Mr.Chien　has　been　arrested　again，the　Japanese　would　certainly　keep　the　monk，Clear　Moon，in　the　temple　as　a　decoy　to　catch　Old　Three　and　others.So　I　dare　not　go　to　the　temple.Would　you　dare　to　go？”

“Look，”　Sergeant　Pai　smiled　sadly　and　took　the　chopper　out　from　under　his　coat.“I　had　prepared　to　die.Of　what　should　I　be　afraid？”

“There　will　be　no　need　for　a　chopper.”Rey　Shuan　also　smiled.“I　think　it　is　most　suitable　for　you　to　go　to　the　temple.You　have　eyes，and　with　a　glance　will　be　able　to　see　the　situation，and　to　know　whether　you　should　go　in　or　not.The　monk，Clear　Moon，does　not　know　you，and　that　is　another　advantage.If　you　do　not　know　each　other　there　can　be　no　expression　which　would　inadvertently　let　out　information.When　you　get　there　you　will　decide　whether　to　go　in　or　not.If　you　go　in　—　ten　thousand　—　you　must　not　talk　with　the　monk.You　must　pose　as　a　man　seeking　to　know　the　future　from　the　gods，and　you　must　act　truly.You　must　pray，saying　that　you　have　lost　your　job，and　when　you　have　shaken　out　the　fortune　stick，and　go　to　the　rack　for　your　fortune　sheet，you　must　take　the　bottom　one　of　the　pile.The　news　we　want　will　be　on　that.If　you　can　but　get　that　sheet　of　paper　I　will　know　why　I　have　lost　touch　with　Old　Three.But　you　—　ten　thousand　—　must　not　bring　that　paper　to　me　directly.I　will　meer　you　at　the　fair　in　the　White　Dagoba　Temple.We　must　look　for　places　where　there　are　crowds　—　places　where　they　have　shows　of　magic，or　the　stands　for　selling　secondhand　clothing.We　will　meet　in　some　place　like　that.”

“These　are　things　that　I　can　do.”　Sergeant　Pai　began　to　look　cheerful.

“I　know.And　you　must，besides，have　some　business　even　if　it　is　only　to　sell　peanuts　so　that　John　Ting　will　not　suspect　you.You　should　go　to　see　him　often，and　talk　nonsense　to　him，and　praise　his　Christian　virtues.In　short　you　must　humor　him　and　not　let　him　—　out　of　suspicion　—　inform　again　on　you.”

“All　right，Mr.Chi.I　have　come　to　life　again，and　if　I　live　only　two　or　three　more　days　I　will　certainly　be　grateful　to　you.”Sergeant　Pai　again　hid　the　knife　and　started　to　open　the　gate　to　go　out.

“If　you　are　arrested，even　if　they　break　your　bones　to　pieces，you　must　not　tell　about　anyone　else，”　Rey　Shuan　warned　him　in　a　low　voice.

Sergeant　Pai　nodded　and　opened　the　gate　of　the　compound.

He　took　the　kitchen　chopper　back　home，and　went　imme-diately　to　the　little　temple.

With　his　head　bent　he　walked　by　the　little　temple　and　looked　out　of　the　corners　of　his　eyes.

The　gate　of　the　temple　was　open　and　no　one　was　visible　in　the　hall　or　in　the　courtyard.He　passed　by　thinking　that　he　must　buy　some　incense　sticks，that　carrying　incense　in　his　hands　he　would　look　more　like　a　real　seeker　of　knowledge　about　the　future.

Not　far　beyond　the　little　temple　he　saw　Wang　the　Third.Sergeant　Pai　recognized　Wang　the　Third's　red　nose　ang　square　head.He　coughed.Wang　the　Third　jumped.Sergeant　Pai　smiled　very　convincingly　and　said，“How　are　you，Third　Master　Wang？”His　approach　was　familiar　but　not　abrupt　or　startling，and　only　he　who　had　been　a　policeman　for　many　years　could　have　been　so　natural.

“What's　the　matter？Who　are　you？”Wang　the　Third　showed　his　confusion.

“Don't　you　remember　me？”　Sergeant　Pai　pretended　to　be　an　old　acquaintance.“My　name　is　Pai.I　live　near　the　Little　Sheep　Fold.”

The　three　words　Little　Sheep　Fold　seemed　to　be　a　dagger　thrust　into　Wang　the　Third's　heart.

Sergeant　Pai　began　to　walk　toward　the　west，and　Wang　the　Third　unconsciously　walked　along　with　him.

Wang　the　Third's　nose　was　still　red　but　it　did　not　shine，and　his　forehead　which　had　always　shone　was　now　not　only　dark　but　heavily　lined.His　eyelids　were　red　as　though　he　had　not　slept　for　many　nights.There　was　dust　not　only　on　his　shoes，but　even　on　his　shoulders　and　on　his　trousers　as　if　he　had　stood　in　the　street　for　several　days.“Let　us　find　a　place　where　we　can　sit　down　awhile，”Sergeant　Pai　suggested.

Wang　the　Third　nodded　his　square　head.

“Ah？”　Wang　the　Third　questioned　as　soon　as　they　had　sat　down.It　was　as　if　Sergeant　Pai　had　already　asked　him　a　question，and　his　words　were　so　tightly　packed　in　his　heart　that　they　were　ready　to　burst　forth.If　even　a　dog　had　wagged　its　tail　to　him　it　was　very　likely　he　would　have　told　what　was　in　his　mind.“My　in-law，my　in-law，they　have　taken　him，”　he　said　abruptly.

“Mr.Chien？”said　Sergeant　Pai，thinking　of　the　time　seven　years　before　when　Mr.Chien　had　been　arrested.“How　do　you　know？”

“They　told　me　—　they，the　Japanese.Ha　—　I　am　smart！In　order　to　protect　my　property，in　order　to　provide　food　and　drink　for　my　daughter　and　my　grandson，I　have　been　friendly　with　the　Japanese.Because　I　peeped　at　the　little　temple　they　went　in　and　stole　my　in-law　away，and　then　they　told　me　not　to　worry，that　they　would　not　make　him　suffer.Hum　—　seven　years　ago　they　beat　the　flesh　off　his　back！I　have　no　face　to　go　home　and　see　my　grandson.I　have　sent　his　grandfather　into　the　tiger's　mouth　—　what　face　have　I　to　see　that　child？”　Wang　the　Third　said　this　over　and　over，almost　as　though　he　were　not　talking　but　spewing　out　the　misery　in　his　heart.

“We　must　think　of　some　way　to　save　Mr.Chien.”　Sergeant　Pai　said　this　trying　to　lead　Wang　the　Third's　words　towards　ways　for　making　plans.

“Save　him？Of　course.”　Wang　the　Third　brought　a　pile　of　bank　notes　from　inside　his　clothes.“I　have　already　prepared　this　money，to　move　around，and　try　to　buy　out　my　in-law.If　this　is　not　enough　I　can　sell　my　houses.I　can　spend　money，money.What　are　houses！Whatever　happens　I　must　first　see　my　in-law　again　and　tell　him　that　I　am　a　fool，that　I　am　not　a　man.I　know　that　once　I　tell　him　this　he　will　understand　me　and　will　forgive　me.He　is　an　educated　man　and　an　understanding　person.If　he　has　been　beaten　to　death　by　them，and　I　cannot　see　him　—　I　really　don't　know　how　I　will　be　able　to　meet　him　in　the　regions　below.My　bones　will　not　stay　in　the　coffin.Help　me，help　me　—　pity　me，pity　me.”

“Surely　I　will　help　you.”

“How　will　you　help　me？”Wang　the　Third　wanted　to　give　Sergeant　Pai　some　money，but　he　must　first　know　clearly　what　was　Sergeant　Pai's　plan　before　he　gave　him　the　money.

“We　must　first　find　out　where　Mr.Chien's　friends　are　and　then　we　will　find　some　way　to　save　him.”

“Where　will　we　go　to　make　inquiries？”

“Inside　the　little　temple.”

“Good，I'll　go.”　Wang　the　Third　stood　up.

“Wait　a　bit.”　Sergeant　Pai　also　stood　up　and　stopped　Wang　the　Third.“I'll　go.You　stand　afar　and　watch.If，unfortunately，I　am　caught　by　them，you　can　take　a　message　to　Rey　Shuan.”

“Good.”　Color　began　to　appear　in　Wang　the　Third's　cheeks.Although　to　save　Mr.Chien　was　still　a　long　way　off，he　felt　that　they　had　started　on　the　path.He　gave　Sergeant　Pai　a　few　bank　notes.“Take　these.If　you　don't　want　them　I'm　the　‘son　of　a　dog.'　You　are　doing　things　for　my　relative，I　cannot　let　you　use　your　own　money　for　eating　and　drinking.”





