5


At　seven　thirty　the　house　was　almost　full.　Seeing　the　crowded　benches　made　Pao　Ching　happy,　but　he　was　worried　as　well.　Something　might　go　wrong　in　front.　He　had　hired　two　local　bouncers　to　guard　the　doors.　They　were　experienced　and　knew　the　bad　elements　in　town　at　sight.　But　Pao　Ching　did　not　want　them　to　assault　anyone.That　would　be　unlucky　on　an　opening　night.　Nor　did　he　want　to　take　charge　of　the　front　of　the　house　himself.　To　get　involved　in　an　argument　would　be　even　worse.　He　had　to　be　everywhere,　see　everything　and　not　be　seen.　Yet　he　wanted　to　be　on　hand　to　settle　any　dispute　that　might　crop　up.

He　stood　backstage,　watching　everything.　When　need　arose,　he　would　pop　out　his　shining　bald　head　and　shout　a　command.　Then　he　would　bow,　shake　hands　with　whoever　was　around,　and　smile　disarmingly　to　straighten　matters　out.

The　powder　and　perfume　of　the　women　singers　always　attracted　a　number　of　young　men　who　could　be　very　troublesome.　Pao　Ching　kept　shooing　away　these　stage_door　loiterers.　They　upset　the　girls　too　much.　But　here,　too,　was　a　difficulty.　Some　of　the　men　might　be　personal　friends　of　important　people　round　town.　If　they　were,　he　usually　invited　them　to　come　backstage　to　take　tea　with　him.　One　of　them　might　volunteer　to　come　on　the　stage　and　present　him　with　a　scroll　to　enhance　his　prestige.　What　worries　a　theater　man　could　have！

By　eight　o'clock　the　house　was　packed　—　though　not　with　paid　admissions.　It　was　full　because　of　the　number　of　complimentary　tickets　which　Pao　Ching　had　handed　out.　But　he　was　delighted.　A　full　house　meant　good　luck.　He　galloped　to　the　front　and　excitedly　told　the　men　at　the　door　to　put　out　the　“Full　House"　sign.　Then,　his　palms　damp,　he　returned　backstage　and　signaled　to　start　the　show.

The　first　number　was　a　song　sung　by　a　local　artist　—　shrill,　tuneless,　inexpert.　The　audience　paid　him　no　attention,　but　continued　to　talk　and　drink　their　tea.

Pao　Ching　peeped　from　behind　the　curtain.　The　theater　was　wider　than　it　was　deep.　In　front　of　the　small　stage　were　rows　of　wooden　benches.　Along　the　sides　were　many　round　tables,　each　with　four　or　five　chairs.　The　curtains　on　either　side　of　the　stage　were　embroidered　with　green　leaves　and　bright　red　peonies,　and　bore　his　own　name.　He　had　had　them　made　specially　in　Shanghai.　The　walls　were　hung　with　decorative　banners　and　scrolls,　and　with　pictures　presented　to　him　and　Lotus　Charm　by　famous　people　in　various　parts　of　the　country.　Although　it　was　small,　the　theater　looked　attractive.　A　pair　of　huge　gas　lamps　hung　in　front　of　the　stage,　throwing　out　greenish_white　rays　that　showed　the　faces　of　the　audience　glaringly.　Pao　Ching　smiled.　He　had　done　it　all　himself.　And　there　was　his　name　embroidered　on　every　curtain　and　hanging.　Wherever　his　eyes　caught　a　picture　or　a　scroll,　he　remembered　a　page　of　his　personal　history:　in　Shanghai,　in　Nanking　and　so　many　other　cities,　where　he　had　appeared　and　made　lifelong　friends.

He　stared　out　at　the　audience　from　behind　the　curtain.　In　the　first　two　rows　sat　the　local　people.　The　rest　of　the　audience　were　mostly　people　from　“down　river."　Even　most　of　the　locals　were　people　who　had　lived　and　worked　in　other　provinces,　and　were　now　back　in　Chungking　because　of　the　war.　They　came　to　listen　to　Pao　Ching　just　to　show　the　others　that　they　had　traveled,　and　could　understand　him.　Pao　Ching　looked　long　and　hard　at　some　people　sitting　in　the　wings.　Some　were　amateurs　who　were　well　trained　in　the　art　and　had　come　to　see　if　Pao　Ching　and　his　troupe　were　any　good.　They　sat　with　their　backs　to　the　stage.　They　wanted　only　to　listen,　not　to　look.　For　them　the　girl　singers'　faces　had　no　interest.　With　his　brow　furrowed,　Pao　Ching　watched　their　reaction.　If　his　and　Lotus　Charm's　singing　came　up　to　their　standards　he　would　have　them　as　regular　customers.

Gradually　the　audience　became　quieter　and　quieter.　Pao　Ching　knew　that　meant　the　program　was　improving.　It　meant　also　that　the　audience　had　had　enough　tea　and　had　cracked　all　their　melon　seeds.　There　was　nothing　else　for　them　to　do　but　to　pay　attention　to　what　was　happening　on　the　stage.

Now　it　was　Lotus　Charm's　turn.

Little　Liu　had　already　tuned　his　san_hsien　instrument.　Slowly　he　came　on　stage,　carrying　the　instrument　tenderly　in　his　hand.　His　small,　handsome　face　was　glistening　pale　in　the　greenish　gas　light.　His　gray　silk　long　gown　fitted　him　like　a　sheath　of　silver.　Silently　he　sat　at　the　table,　put　down　his　instrument　with　exaggerated　care,　and　began　to　pull　up　the　sleeves　of　his　gown.　Then,　he　picked　up　the　instrument,　put　it　in　position　and　tried　it　for　tune　with　the　plectrum　in　his　fingers.　He　tilted　his　head　to　listen　to　the　tone　and　pitch.　Then　he　stared　at　one　of　the　hanging　banners,　an　almost　disdainful　expression　on　his　face,　as　though　he　hated　being　merely　an　accompanist.

Beside　the　table　stood　the　drum　which　Pao　Ching　had　carried　thousands　of　miles,　and　the　drumstick　not　much　longer　than　an　ordinary　chopstick.　Then　there　was　a　pair　of　red　castanets　with　black　tassels.　The　cloth　on　the　table　was　green　silk　embroidered　with　red　and　white　lotus　blossoms,　and　three　big　characters　which　read　“Fang　Lotus　Charm."

Slowly　the　stage　curtain　began　to　move.　“Take　it　easy！　Take　it　easy！　Reserve　your　voice！"　Pao　Ching　advised　her　before　she　went　on.　The　curtain　rose　higher　and　Lotus　Charm　walked　sedately　out,　a　lovely　creature　from　another　world,　a　child　draped　in　all　the　glamour　of　show　business.

For　a　moment　she　stood　still,　as　if　sizing　up　her　audience.Then　she　lifted　her　little　round　face,　a　mischievous　smile　scattering　along　the　sides　of　her　nose.

She　wore　a　black　crepe　gown　with　white　floral　patterns　on　the　short　sleeves.　On　her　wrist　glistened　a　tiny　watch.　Her　two　little　braids,　tied　with　red　ribbons,　hung　in　front　of　her　shoulders.　The　red　ribbons　matched　her　red　lips.　And　as　she　walked,　she　seemed　to　dance.

Her　slim　figure　undulated　seductively　as　she　walked　to　the　drum　stand　and　took　the　drumstick.　Twice　she　beat　the　drum　and　immediately　Little　Liu　started　to　play　his　stringed　instrument.　Following　the　melody,　Lotus　Charm　beat　the　drum　only　occasionally,　sparking　the　rhythm　in　casual　style.　Her　eyes　were　fixed　on　the　center　of　the　drum.　But　the　smile　was　still　there,　as　if　she　had　just　thought　of　a　joke　and　wanted　to　laugh　but　could　not.

Presently　the　drum　and　the　stringed　instrument　stopped　playing.　Lotus　Charm　smiled　a　little　and　looked　down　at　the　audience.　Then　she　said　shyly　and　softly　that　she　was　going　to　sing　a　passage　from　“Western　Chambers."　Thereupon　she　started　beating　her　drum　energetically.

“Western　Chambers"　was　the　most　difficult　ballad　to　sing　to　the　drum　and　castanets.　Only　three　or　four　famed　artists　dared　to　tackle　it.　Everybody　knew　the　love　story　of　Ying　Ying　who　sent　her　maid　for　her　lover,　Chang.　But　the　long　lyrics　and　complicated　musical　passages　usually　frightened　singers　away　from　it.　It　was　written　for　the　rhyme　and　pronunciation　of　colloquial　Pekingese.　If　it　was　sung　by　a　person　with　a　nimble　tongue,　who　could　speak　good　Mandarin,　the　vocal　pattern　could　be　vivid　and　clear　as　dewdrops　on　a　lotus　leaf.　But　in　the　mouth　of　a　less　expert　singer　it　was　likely　to　sound　terrible.

When　Lotus　Charm　announced　her　number,　her　voice　was　so　faint　that　she　could　hardly　be　heard　by　the　well_trained　amateurs　sitting　at　the　far　end　of　the　wings,　their　backs　to　the　stage.　But　when　she　finished　the　first　verse　they　all　turned　round　to　see　who　was　singing　this　difficult　number.　Though　her　voice　was　not　strong,　her　diction　was　flawless.　She　disposed　of　the　first　long　phrase　in　one　breath,　rolling　it　out　of　her　little　throat　like　a　string　of　pearls.　Each　word　was　a　jewel,　round,　firm,　iridescent.　Twenty_seven　words　—　“The　sweet　girl　of　sixteen　was　too　tired　to　sit　at　her　dressing　table,　for　she　was　Chu　Ying　Ying　lying　in　bed　suffering　from　a　long　sickness."

From　beginning　to　end,　Lotus　Charm　appeared　to　be　singing　with　great　restraint,　as　if　she　did　not　care　to　please　the　audience.　But　whenever　she　came　to　a　difficult　passage,　she　sang　it　correctly.　And　never　once　did　she　skip　a　treacherous　cadenza　as　some　singers　do.　Gradually　the　tempo　of　her　ballad　became　faster　and　faster,　but　she　looked　casual　and　mischievous　about　the　whole　thing,　singing　nonchalantly　and　with　exquisite　feeling.　When　she　came　to　the　final　cadence,　she　could　have　raised　her　voice　to　a　climactic　high　pitch　to　win　the　audience's　applause　as　most　professionals　did,　but　she　finished　it　on　the　ordinary　note.　Then　she　placed　the　stick　gently　on　the　drum,and　bowed　low,　so　low　that　the　ends　of　her　braids　touched　the　drum.　After　that,　she　turned　and　walked　slowly　toward　the　exit.　As　she　got　nearer　the　exit　she　started　to　run,　like　a　school　girl　delighted　to　be　freed　from　class.

Not　until　she　had　pulled　the　curtain　behind　her　at　the　exit　was　there　a　wave　of　applause.　The　people　in　front　did　not　know　what　she　was　singing　about.　The　applause　came　from　the　amateurs　sitting　in　the　wings.　Even　if　her　voice　was　weak　they　applauded　her　because　they　knew　it　was　not　easy　for　a　girl　so　young　to　sing　such　an　intricate　ballad　flawlessly.

Little　Liu　knew　that　this　number　Lotus　Charm　had　chosen　was　most　complicated,　and　he　was　glad　he　had　come　through　without　making　a　mistake.　When　Lotus　Charm　finished　he　gave　a　sigh　of　relief,　smoothed　himself　and　walked　off　stage　after　her.

Some　of　the　audience　stood　up　as　if　to　leave.　They　were　disappointed　because　Lotus　Charm　had　sung　without　even　giving　them　a　glance,　and　worse　still,　she　had　sung　something　they　could　not　understand.

Then　the　cloth　on　the　table　was　changed　again.　This　time　it　was　embroidered　with　a　stork　and　a　deer,　with　two　large　multicolored　characters:　“Jeweled　Lute."　The　audience　sat　down　again.　They　might　as　well　stay　to　see　if　Jeweled　Lute　was　any　less　disappointing.

Little　Liu　came　out　first.　This　time　he　twanged　the　strings　louder　when　he　tuned　the　instrument.　If　all　he　tried　to　do　when　he　was　playing　for　Lotus　Charm　was　not　to　make　a　mistake,　it　was　obvious　that　now　he　wanted　to　show　off　his　talent.　His　instrument　tuned,　he　seemed　to　be　waiting　anxiously　for　Jeweled　Lute　to　appear.　His　eyes　were　fixed　on　the　curtain　at　the　entrance.

And　finally　Jeweled　Lute　emerged　from　behind　the　curtain.　With　her　head　lowered　she　walked　quickly　to　the　drum　stand,　as　though　she　was　in　a　hurry　to　finish　her　number　because　she　had　some　important　matter　to　attend　to　after　singing.

She　was　naturally　tall,　but　tonight　she　had　high_heeled　shoes　on,　and　her　curly　hair　was　piled　high　on　her　head,　helping　her　to　look　like　a　tall　European　showgirl　in　Chinese　costume.　Her　face　was　carefully　made　up,　and　a　bright　red　gown　sheathed　her　body.　Her　ears,　fingers,　and　wrists　were　encrusted　with　fake　diamonds　she　had　borrowed　from　her　mother.　They　shone　and　sparkled　gaudily.

The　stage　is　a　strange　world.　It　can　make　an　ugly　woman　beautiful.　Jeweled　Lute　was　not　very　attractive,　but　art　and　artifice　made　everything　about　her　colorful　and　shiny.　She　took　on　an　exotic　and　mysterious　fascination　which　made　the　audience　applaud　her　the　moment　she　came　on　stage.

What　did　the　music　matter！　Her　drum　beats　were　heavy　and　out　of　rhythm,　and　the　music　was　discordant.　Little　Liu　plucked　the　strings　of　his　instrument　with　all　his　might.　To　give　more　power　to　his　finger　tips　he　bent　back　a　little,　biting　his　lower　lip　under　the　strain　of　his　efforts.

All　this　noise　—　the　drum,　the　castanets,　the　stringed　instrument　—　would　have　made　many　nauseated.　But　the　audience　sat　absorbed,　as　though　they　had　been　appreciating　this　kind　of　noise　all　their　lives.

Jeweled　Lute　was　quickly　aware　of　her　success,　so　she　concentrated　on　assuring　herself　some　spare_time　occupation.　She　fixed　her　eyes　on　one　man　for　a　while,　then　shifted　to　another.　And　to　each　she　gave　a　sign,　changing　her　eyes　from　brown　to　black　and　from　black　to　brown.　When　she　finished　her　first　number,　she　announced　she　was　going　to　“offer"　a　special　number　called　“Madam　Tu".　That　was　a　love　story　about　a　woman　who　threw　her　jewel　case　into　the　river　when　she　found　out　her　lover　was　going　to　sell　her　to　another　man　to　raise　money.　The　audience　was　delighted.　There　was　a　huge　round　of　applause.

Her　voice　was　large　and　shrill,　with　croaking　undertones.　Because　she　shouted　rather　than　sang　there　were　no　soft　notes.　What　did　it　matter　if　her　words　were　not　clear,　or　if　mispronounced.　No　one　cared　what　she　sang.　The　men　felt　her　eyes　and　liked　the　glances　she　gave　them.　That　was　more　important　to　Jeweled　Lute　than　pronouncing　her　words.

It　didn't　matter　whether　Little　Liu's　accompaniment　kept　up　with　her.　He　held　his　arm　well　away　from　the　imstrument　and　plucked　the　strings　lustily.　His　heavy　playing　and　her　shouting　matched　each　other　perfectly,　even　when　they　were　out　of　tune.　The　audience　watched　them　absorbed.

After　about　twenty　minutes　of　clanging　pandemonium,　Jeweled　Lute　came　to　the　end　of　her　ballad.　She　bowed　her　head,　and　wagged　her　face　slowly　from　left　to　right,　and　back　again.　Then　she　straightened　and　walked　slowly　away,　her　hips　swinging　in　exaggerated　fashion.　Thunderous　applause　followed　her.

Pao　Ching　was　the　last　on　the　program　—　the　position　of　honor　—　the　star.

His　personal　banner　for　the　table　was　of　red　serge.　It　was　plain　except　for　three　words　“Fang　Pao　Ching"　cut　out　in　black　satin.　As　the　tablecloth　was　put　on　the　table　the　doors　at　the　back　of　the　theater　opened　and　the　people　began　to　stream　out　—　who　wanted　to　listen　to　a　man　sing　after　all　that　sex　on　high　heels？　But　a　few　of　them　remained,　politely　bored.

The　curtain　went　up,　and　the　gas　light　was　shining　greenly　on　the　shiny　bald　head　of　Pao　Ching.　He　smiled　and　nodded　as　he　walked　forward　across　the　stage　to　thank　the　audience　for　their　applause.　He　was　dressed　in　a　long　voluminous　navy　blue　silk　gown　and　black　satin　slippers　of　thousand_layer　soles.　He　always　dressed　appropriately　for　the　occasion.

With　confidence　he　walked　to　the　drum　stand　as　the　audience　watched　curiously.　As　to　those　ignorant　people　who　had　walked　out　on　him,　he　did　not　mind　at　all.　He　had　confidence　in　his　own　art.　The　amateurs　could　appreciate　his　singing.　Why　worry　about　the　young　men　who　had　just　left.　After　all,they　only　came　to　the　theater　to　gape　at　the　women　players.

His　drum　beat　was　very　simple,　and　was　similar　in　rhythm　to　Lotus　Charm's.　But　he　beat　more　heavily,　drawing　deeply　resonant　and　pleasing　sounds　from　the　heart　of　the　drum.　His　eyes　were　fixed　on　the　face　of　the　drum,　to　select　the　right　moment　and　the　right　spot　on　which　to　beat.　The　drum　was　his　slave.　His　beat　controlled　Little　Liu's　accompaniment,　which　was　now　graceful　and　in　harmony.

After　his　first　number　Pao　Ching　thanked　the　audience　for　their　kind　patronage.　He　apologized　for　anything　which　might　have　escaped　his　attention　on　this　opening　day.　Soon,　he　said,　the　theater　would　be　perfect　for　their　comfort.　He　meant　to　say　all　this　with　dignity　and　fluency　of　speech,　but　occasionally　he　lost　the　words　he　had　rehearsed.　When　he　became　inarticulate　he　just　smiled,　and　the　audience　forgave　him.　They　applauded　heartily,　which　pleased　him.

He　announced　his　next　number　—“On　the　Long　Bent　Bridge,"　a　tragic　story　taken　from　The　Three　Kingdoms　,　telling　how　a　fighting　general　and　his　baby　prince　were　lost　in　battle.

Even　before　he　started　to　sing,　the　audience　was　hushed.　They　could　sense　that　here　was　a　great　artist,　his　heart　in　his　work.　A　change　had　come　over　Pao　Ching.　His　smile　was　gone,　his　eyebrows　were　stiff,　and　his　eyes　concentrated　on　the　center　of　the　drum.

The　opening　words　burst　from　his　throat　in　magnificent　cadence:　“The　battle　raging　in　the　faraway　hills,　suffering　people　whose　blood　flew　red　in　the　air　..."　The　audience　was　spell_bound　—　gripped　in　silence.　No　one　dared　to　cough.　Pao　Ching's　voice　came　rolling　out,　round　and　firm,　each　word　delivered　with　feeling.　He　sang　slowly　to　give　the　greatest　value　to　every　tone.　Tender　or　brave,　sober　or　gay,　each　word　was　handled　with　exquisite　artistry.

Pao　Ching's　singing　demonstrated　that　drum　singing　is　the　best　marriage　between　folk　literature　and　folk　music.　He　acted　as　he　sang:　“Loyalty　and　fidelity　are　esteemed　through　the　ages,　life　is　of　no　importance　if　one　doesn't　die　bravely."　He　could　also　be　sad　and　tender　with　heart_rending　effect:　“Mrs.　Mei　had　the　prince　in　her　bosom.　Following　the　movement　of　the　moon,she　shed　her　tears　in　the　bleak　autumn　wind."　Such　effects　could　only　be　obtained　with　the　perfect　blending　of　words　and　music,　which　was　the　art　of　the　great　singer.

Pao　Ching　dramatized　the　song　with　gestures　and　body　movements.　His　drumstick　was　a　magic　wand　to　represent　anything　in　the　story.　When　he　held　it　horizontally,　it　became　a　bright　sword;　when　he　held　it　vertically,　it　meant　a　shining　spear;　when　he　moved　it　in　the　air,　a　furious　combat　was　taking　place　on　the　battlefield.　When　he　stooped,　it　signified　he　had　just　walked　out　of　a　door　in　the　story.　A　step　with　his　foot　and　he　had　mounted　the　horse.

When　Lotus　Charm　and　Jeweled　Lute　sang,they　also　dramatized　the　story.　But　Lotus　Charm　lacked　the　dramatic　power　of　Pao　Ching,　while　Jeweled　Lute　overacted.　Pao　Ching　was　an　expert　technician.　His　pantomiming　not　only　helped　to　give　an　impressive　dramatic　clarity　to　the　story,　but　it　also　enhanced　the　value　of　the　music.

Occasionally　he　gave　a　monstrous　beat　on　the　drum,　and　the　stringed　instrument　paused.　Then　into　the　silence　he　would　roll　ten　or　fifteen　rhyming　lines,　just　as　if　he　were　talking.　A　heavy　beat　on　the　drum　and　the　stringed　instrument　would　come　in　with　perfect　timing.

In　this　number　Pao　Ching　had　told　and　acted　out　the　story　of　the　baby　prince's　mother　who　killed　herself,　and　the　gallant　general　who　fought　his　way　out　of　encirclement,　carrying　the　baby　prince　in　his　arm.　And　as　he　sang　the　audience　were　sure　that　from　his　mouth　came　the　thunder　of　horses'　hoofs　and　the　bloodthirsty　cries　of　the　soldiers.

And　finally　Pao　Ching　came　to　the　lyrics　in　praise　of　the　brave,　loyal　general　whose　name　would　live　forever.　This　with　tender　pride　and　patriotism　that　gripped　all　who　heard　him.　Then　with　sweeping　bow　he　left　the　stage.　The　show　was　over.　The　applause　rose　to　the　roof　and　thundered.

Wiping　the　perspiration　from　his　forehead,　Pao　Ching　went　out　in　front　to　thank　the　audience　for　their　acclaim.　There　were　cheers　again.　He　could　not　make　himself　heard.　“Wonderful！　Wonderful！　they　shouted.

“Thank　you,　thank　you,"　he　managed,　smiling.　“See　you　tomorrow.　Come　again　—　we　have　many　more　numbers.　Please　come　again."　As　he　spoke,　he　tugged　at　the　navy　blue　silk　that　was　sticking　to　his　back.　It　was　soaking　wet.





