15


The　foggy　season　had　come　again　to　Chungking.　Everywhere　one　could　hear　the　sound　of　hammering.　The　people　were　rebuilding　the　city.　They　worked　fast,　and　within　a　few　months　the　scars　of　war　had　almost　vanished.　In　the　main　streets,　at　least,　there　was　hardly　a　sign　of　destruction.　Only　in　the　back　streets　were　those　hideous　blackened　spaces　noticeable,　where　the　bombs　had　done　their　horrible　work.　And　there　was　a　difference　in　the　new　face　of　the　city.　Two_story　houses　instead　of　three　—　and　they　were　of　flimsy　wood　and　lath　construction.　They　made　the　city　look　broader　and　shabby,　giving　the　impression　of　a　vast　shanty　town.

Pao　Ching　busied　himself　helping　the　owner　of　the　theater　with　the　repairs.　He　found　laborers,　carried　materials　himself,　and　worked　on　the　roof　with　what　men　he　could　muster.　Finally　the　theater　was　usable　again.　It　was　not　beautiful　by　any　means,　but　it　was　a　theater　again　and　ready　for　opening.

On　the　opening　night　they　sang　the　new　ballads.　Lotus　Charm　sang　hers　first,　as　Pao　Ching　watched　from　the　wings.　He　was　always　fascinated　when　he　watched　her,　and　this　time　he　noticed　she　had　acquired　a　new　technique.　In　many　respects　her　singing　was　the　same,　but　in　a　subtle　way　it　was　different.　She　was　putting　more　interpretation　in　her　words.　There　was　fire　and　pathos　in　her　voice,　and　every　word　was　clear　and　distinct.　For　a　while　he　was　puzzled　and　then　it　came　to　him.　Of　course,　this　was　because　she　was　learning　to　read　and　write.　For　the　first　time　in　her　life　the　girl　really　understood　what　she　was　singing.　That　was　because　Meng　Liang　had　gone　over　the　ballad　word　for　word　with　her,　explaining　the　meaning　of　everything.　He　had　drawn　for　her　a　series　of　word　pictures　of　the　events　of　which　she　was　singing,　and　he　had　accomplished　a　miracle.　She　was　singing　with　her　heart.

The　audience　also　noticed　the　change.　They　appreciated　the　new　ballads,　but　they　were　obviously　enthusiastic　too　at　the　progress　the　girl　drum　singer　had　made.　When　she　had　finished　they　joined　in　loud　applause.　Lotus　Charm　had　never　had　such　a　success.

She　came　running　backstage,　her　pigtails　flying.　She　almost　collided　with　Pao　Ching.　“Father,"　she　cried,　“I　don't　know　what　happened　to　me.　When　I　went　out　I　thought　I　could　not　remember　a　word,　but　suddenly　everything　came　flowing　from　my　heart;　and　I　was　singing　in　time,　and　I　knew　it."　Her　young　face　clouded.　“But　why　wasn't　Mr.　Meng　here？I　wanted　him　to　hear　me."

Pao　Ching　wondered　that　too.　Meng　Liang　had　not　turned　up.　He　was　pondering　this　as　Lotus　Charm　babbled　on.　She　told　him　how　much　better　it　was　to　know　what　she　was　singing,　how　Mr.　Meng's　instruction　had　helped　her.

Jeweled　Lute　approached　them.　Her　face　was　set,　her　eyebrows　pursed.　She　did　not　congratulate　Lotus　Charm,　as　she　had　intended,　but　stood　listening　to　what　they　were　saying.　She　had　never　been　jealous　of　Lotus　Charm　because　it　had　seemed　that　the　younger　girl　was　no　competition.　But　now　she　was　worried.　All　that　applause　for　this　child,　just　because　she　had　sung　new　songs.　At　all　costs　she　had　to　outshine　her.　If　Lotus　Charm　was　the　star　of　the　show,　she　would　also　get　the　pick　of　the　rich　men　who　came　to　pay　their　compliments　to　the　artists.

For　a　moment　she　nibbled　her　full　underlip.　Then　with　a　shrug　of　her　shoulders　she　walked　away.

When　it　came　her　turn　to　appear　she　sang　a　romantic　sexy　number.　But　the　audience　was　attuned　to　patriotism;　romance　did　not　fit　with　the　rest　of　the　show,　no　matter　how　alluring　the　singer.　For　Jeweled　Lute　it　was　a　defeat　—　the　first　time　an　audience　had　been　cold　to　her.　Tight-faced　she　went　to　Lotus　Charm's　dressing　room.　She　flung　herself　on　the　couch　and　said　in　a　harsh　dry　voice,　“How's　the　little　scholar？Where　did　you　get　that　new　ballad？And　who　taught　you？He　must　have　a　long　arm　to　be　able　to　get　all　that　feeling　into　you."

Lotus　Charm　swung　round.　Her　face　was　scarlet.　But　before　she　could　answer　Phoenix　Girl　burst　out,　“What　do　you　mean　Jeweled　Lute？"

Jeweled　Lute　grinned　airily.　“What　I　said.　If　my　language　isn't　pleasant　to　you,　little　girl,　then　go　cover　your　ears."

Phoenix　Girl　looked　as　if　she　was　going　to　cry.　“You'd　better　go　see　my　mother　if　you　want　to　talk　like　that,"　she　said　angrily　and　got　up.　Jeweled　Lute　took　the　hint　and　went　out,　but　over　her　shoulder　she　flung　a　foul　word　concerning　man's　anatomy.

Lotus　Charm　looked　helplessly　at　Phoenix　Girl.　“Why　do　they　have　to　talk　about　that　all　the　time？You　know,　mother　says　it,　too."

Phoenix　Girl　shook　her　head.　“I　wouldn't　know,"　she　said　truthfully.　“But　that's　how　it　is."

Lotus　Charm　felt　hot　all　over.　She　looked　at　herself　in　the　mirror　and　deliberately　said　the　foul　word　over　and　over　to　herself.　She　didn't　feel　any　different.　Why　did　others　like　to　use　it？Mr.　Meng　had　never　mentioned　it,　so　perhaps　she　should　not　say　it　aloud.　She　appreciated　Mr.　Meng.　He　gave　her　peace　of　mind,　and　she　never　felt　humble　when　she　was　with　him.

Pao　Ching　sang　his　new　ballads.　The　audience　applauded,　but　afterward　some　of　them　said　they　came　to　the　theater　to　get　away　from　war,　and　they　would　rather　have　the　old　songs.　Pao　Ching　merely　smiled　and　said,　“One　has　to　try　new　things　someday."

Lotus　Charm　told　her　father　what　Jeweled　Lute　had　said.　Pao　Ching　laughed　it　off.　“She's　lazy,　that's　all,"　he　remarked.　“She　just　doesn't　want　to　learn.　She's　jealous."　When　Lotus　Charm　asked　him　why　Jeweled　Lute　used　her　mother's　favorite　word,　he　didn't　answer.

Upstairs　in　his　room　Pao　Ching　reflected　that　this　was　one　of　his　good　days.　Lotus　Charm　was　a　drawing　card　now.　If　the　Tang　family　caused　any　trouble　he　could　tell　them　to　take　that　trollop　of　theirs　with　them.　It　was　a　good　feeling.

Business　prospered　for　a　month.　Between　shows　Pao　Ching　and　Lotus　Charm　filled　in　with　free　performances　for　the　government,　recruiting　and　collecting　money　for　the　wounded.　The　newspapers　were　quick　to　notice　their　free　shows.　Scarcely　a　day　passed　that　their　names　were　not　in　print.　Pao　Ching　began　to　feel　that　he　had　really　arrived.　Now　they　were　respectable　people,　artists　on　the　same　level　with　the　new　school　of　acting.

One　night　he　took　Lotus　Charm　to　supper　and　told　her　how　lucky　they　were.　“Last　year　you　were　nothing,"　he　pointed　out.　“Now　you　are　a　star,　far　more　important　than　Jeweled　Lute.　You　should　be　very　happy."

She　didn't　answer　immediately.　“Well,"　he　insisted,　“what　are　you　thinking？"

She　gave　him　a　half　smile.　“So　you　think　I　shall　be　as　respected　as　the　stage　people　if　I　keep　on　learning　new　ballads？"　She　wanted　to　rise　as　high　as　she　could　in　social　status　in　order　to　forget　having　had　to　kneel　before　Madame　Commander　Wang,　and　to　avoid　being　sold　as　a　concubine.

“Of　course,"　said　Pao　Ching.　“The　more　you　learn　the　more　you　will　be　respected."　But　he　wished　he　had　not　said　that,　because　one　half　of　him　was　certain　that　learning　would　bring　this　woman-child　to　destruction.

They　said　little　to　each　other　after　that.　Lotus　Charm　went　to　bed　without　hardly　a　word,　which　made　Pao　Ching　desperately　unhappy.　She　was　withdrawing　more　and　more　inside　herself　these　days.

The　next　morning　Pao　Ching　had　a　visitor.　It　was　Fourth　Master　Tang,　looking　sly　as　ever.　Pao　Ching　could　tell　from　his　expression　that　something　was　afoot.

“Pao　Ching,"　began　Tang,　“I　want　a　long　leave　of　absence　for　my　daughter."

Pao　Ching　smiled.　“She　has　found　something　better？"

Fourth　Master　Tang's　eyebrows　went　up.　His　hands　made　a　disparaging　gesture.　“Of　course.　I　have　formed　a　new　company　myself.　I　picked　up　a　few　girl　singers,　and　I　feel　they　should　be　employed."

Pao　Ching　wanted　to　dance　with　joy.　There　were　hosts　of　singers　from　Shanghai　and　Nanking　in　town　now.　Every　day　one　or　two　came　to　pester　him　for　jobs,　but　he　would　not　take　them　on,　because　most　of　them　were　part-time　whores,　and　he　did　not　want　such　people　in　his　show,　even　if　they　could　sing　like　angels.　Let　Tang　have　them　—　and　Jeweled　Lute　as　well.　“My　earnest　congratulations,　brother,"　he　said.　“May　great　fortune　attend　your　efforts."

Fourth　Master　Tang　was　in　a　magnanimous　mood.　“My　dear　Pao　Ching,"　he　said,　“I　shall　never　forget　how　you　helped　us　when　we　first　arrived,　and　as　you　know,　I　am　a　most　generous　person.　Never　can　it　be　said　that　I　am　not　the　first　to　return　a　favor.　As　I　said　to　my　wife,　everything　we　do　must　be　to　help　our　dear　friends,　the　Fangs.　So　this　is　what　I　will　do."　He　paused,　his　little　rabbit　teeth　bared,　his　black　eyes　fixed　on　Pao　Ching.　“How　would　you　like　it,　if　we　asked　you　and　Lotus　Charm　to　join　our　show？You　would　have　top　billing　on　the　male　side　of　course,　and　Lotus　Charm　—　well,　she　would　be　about　fourth　—　seeing　her　voice　is　weak."

Pao　Ching　couldn't　smile　in　the　face　of　this　effrontery.　“I　wouldn't　think　of　it,"　he　snapped.　“I　have　my　company　and　you　have　yours."

Tang's　eyebrows　raised　a　little.　“But　you　realize,　dear　brother,　that　Little　Liu　will　not　be　able　to　accompany　you　any　more.　I　shall　need　him　for　my　own　company."

Pao　Ching　wanted　to　hit　Fourth　Master　Tang,　to　push　him　over　and　kick　him　in　the　face.　The　old　turtle,　the　sly　scoundrel.

“But,　Fourth　Master,"　he　said　evenly　although　his　hands　itched　to　do　violence　to　him,　“our　acts　are　so　different,　it　wouldn't　work.　I'll　have　no　trouble　getting　an　accompanist."

Fourth　Master　Tang　lowered　his　eyelids,　blinked　slowly,　and　then　slid　away.

Pao　Ching　knew　it　was　a　battle　of　nerves　when　Mrs.　Tang　waddled　in.　Her　face　was　wreathed　in　a　greasy　smile.　She　cackled　gay　greetings　to　everyone,　and　went　straight　to　Lotus　Charm's　room.　In　her　hand　was　a　bunch　of　faded　flowers　she　had　picked　out　of　a　garbage　can.　She　gave　it　to　Lotus　Charm　and　purred,　“Lotus　Charm　dear,　I've　come　running　over　to　ask　you　to　help.　I　know　you　will.　You　are　such　a　good_hearted　girl."

Pao　Ching　wasted　no　time.　He　confronted　Mrs.　Tang　and　congratulated　her　warmly,　shaking　his　hands　up　and　down,　as　if　he　were　applauding　a　great　star.　“My　dear　Fourth　Sister-in-law,　congratulations！It　will　be　my　pleasure　to　send　you　some　of　the　best　silken　scrolls　I　can　find.　What　a　happy　day　for　us　all."

Mrs.　Tang　let　go　a　mighty　burst　of　laughter.　It　sounded　as　if　a　firecracker　had　gone　off　deep　in　her　belly.　“I'm　glad　you　feel　that　way,　and　what　else　do　you　think　has　happened？Jeweled　Lute　and　Little　Liu　are　getting　married.　It's　about　time,　of　course.　But　it　does　keep　him　in　the　family,　doesn't　it,　and　that's　important　in　show　business."　She　cackled　like　a　hen　as　she　said　that,　and　wagged　her　fat　face　at　Pao　Ching,　who　looked　like　a　man　who　had　lost　his　fortune　but　found　a　dollar.

“Wonderful,"　he　said　with　a　precise,　faked　smile.　“With　such　a　double　happy　event　the　whole　Fang　family　will　certainly　have　to　come　over　to　congratulate　you."

When　the　old　slut　had　gone,　Pao　Ching　had　another　fight　on　his　hands.　Mrs.　Fang　had　her　own　ideas　on　how　to　run　a　theater.　They　were　ruined　now.　Everything　was　his　fault.　He　should　never　have　learned　the　new　ballads,　and　why　hadn't　he　hired　all　those　singing　girls,　to　stop　the　Tangs'getting　at　them？He　hadn't　a　brain　in　his　body.

Pao　Ching　ran　angrily　from　the　house,　to　see　Little　Liu.　Little　Liu　looked　like　an　embarrassed　lobster　when　Pao　Ching　congratulated　him.　“I'm　so　sorry,　elder　brother,"　he　mumbled　contritely,　“so　sorry."

“Why　be　sorry？"　inquired　Pao　Ching　in　tones　of　honey.　“We　are　brothers　sworn　under　Heaven,　so　we　can　help　each　other　always.　Your　marrying　Jeweled　Lute　is　one　thing　—　your　art　and　playing　is　another."

Little　Liu　looked　miserable.　“But　I　have　promised　the　Tangs　that　when　we　are　married　I　won't　play　for　you　any　more.　That　is　one　of　the　terms　of　the　marriage　contract,　elder　brother."

Pao　Ching　wanted　to　spit　in　his　face,　but　he　kept　his　smile.　“All　right,　younger　brother.　No　hard　feelings.　Don't　feel　sorry."

Then　Pao　Ching　went　to　South　Warm　Springs　as　fast　as　if　he　were　being　chased　by　an　army　of　ghosts.

He　found　Useless　Fang.　“Hello,　younger　brother,"　Useless　Fang　said.　“I　have　some　new　ballads.　Mr.　Meng　has　written　them.　Listen！"

“Never　mind　about　the　new　ballads,"　said　Pao　Ching.　“We　are　in　a　mess.　Something　awful　has　happened."　He　told　Useless　Fang　the　story.　Then　he　said,　“What　do　you　say,　elder　brother？You　come　right　back　and　help　us　fight　the　Tangs."

“I'll　admit　it's　a　problem,"　conceded　Useless　Fang.　He　was　beginning　to　feel　cold,　as　the　prospect　of　having　to　work　loomed　on　the　horizon.

“It's　cannibalism,"　cried　Pao　Ching.　“I　treated　them　so　well,　even　Little　Liu,　and　because　of　that　bitch's　arse,　he　turns　his　back　to　us.　The　little　prostitute！May　he　have　crabs　the　rest　of　his　life."　Then,　because　Useless　Fang　was　trying　to　look　unconcerned,　he　said　sternly,　“You　have　lived　on　me　all　these　years,　so　give　me　the　good　word.　Don't　just　stand　there　saying　nothing！"

Useless　Fang　sighed.　Tears　glistened　in　his　eyes.　He　shook　his　head,　and　then　he　said,　“Don't　worry,　Pao　Ching,　I　will　come　with　you.　Am　I　not　your　brother,　and　will　I　not　give　you　sweeter　music　than　that　little　lobster　ever　produced？But　you　must　be　sure　to　give　me　a　special　billing.　Bill　me　as　Amateur　Mr.　Fang　Pao　Sun.　I　don't　want　to　appear　just　as　a　professional　accompanist."

Pao　Ching　agreed,　the　tears　rolling　from　his　eyes.　He　loved　his　brother　and　understood　the　sacrifice　Useless　Fang　was　making.　“My　dear　brother,"　he　sobbed,　“you　are　a　real　brother,　and　they　call　you　Useless.　But　every　time　I　am　in　trouble　who　comes　to　the　rescue？It　is　you.　You　are　more　helpful　than　anyone　I　know."

Useless　Fang　told　him　later　that　Mr.　Meng　was　going　to　the　city.　Pao　Ching　immediately　produced　money　to　buy　bus　tickets　for　all　of　them.　Was　not　Mr.　Meng　their　lucky　star？

On　the　way　back　in　the　bus　Pao　Ching　figured　his　profit　and　loss:　lost　Jeweled　Lute,　the　singing　tart;　lost　Little　Liu,　the　musical　pimp;　a　new　company　to　compete　with　—　lost　a　few　patrons　too　lazy　to　walk　to　his　theater.　Gains:　his　brother　as　accompanist;　a　new　star　in　Lotus　Charm;　his　face,　most　certainly.　So　he　had　won　face.　He　felt　happy　about　that　and　began　to　sing,　making　up　his　lines,　“Elder　brother　plays,　younger　brother　sings.　Arise,　Little　Lotus　—　arise,　arise,　arise."

The　other　passengers　looked　at　him　oddly,　but　said　nothing.　These　“foreigners"　were　queer,　they　had　decided.

Lotus　Charm　was　delighted　with　the　news.　Pao　Ching　knew　then　that　his　next　hurdle　was　to　break　the　news　to　his　wife.　He　decided　to　try　some　of　Meng　Liang's　tactics.　He　sent　Phoenix　Girl　out　to　buy　wine,　and　ordered　meat　dumplings　and　soya　noodles　for　dinner.

The　next　evening　Pao　Ching　had　visitors.　First,　Little　Liu　burst　in　to　see　him,　and　stood　trembling　and　speechless.　Behind　him　came　Fourth　Master　Tang,　looking　like　a　wolf　dog　that　had　been　whipped　and　thrown　into　a　pond.　Neither　of　them　spoke.

“What　has　happened？"　Pao　Ching　demanded.

Fourth　Master　Tang　almost　screamed.　“You've　got　to　help　me.　You　must.　You're　the　only　one　who　can."

Pao　Ching　raised　his　eyebrows.　“What　can　I　do　if　I　don't　know　what　has　happened？Money,　I　have　none,"　he　added　quickly　as　an　afterthought.

Little　Liu　screamed　the　bad　news.　“Jeweled　Lute　has　been　arrested."　He　wrung　his　hands,　and　the　sweat　poured　from　his　pallid　face.

“Arrested？"　echoed　Pao　Ching.　“What　for？"

The　pair　looked　at　each　other.　Neither　seemed　to　want　to　explain.　Finally　Fourth　Master　Tang　explained　with　a　pained　air:“The　child　was　careless.　She　was　attending　an　opium　party　in　a　hotel　with　some　friends.　She　wasn't　smoking　herself,　of　course,　but　they　were.　She　was　careless."

Pao　Ching　had　a　wild　desire　to　laugh,　to　spit　in　their　faces.　The　old　whoremaster,　the　pimpish　bastard　—　coming　back　to　him　with　their　troubles,　because　their　tart　was　in　trouble,　and　not　for　hawking　her　wares　on　the　streets.　But　he　checked　himself.　He　was　not　one　to　rejoice　or　profit　by　others'　misfortunes.　Just　because　he　didn't　do　what　they　did,　was　no　reason　for　him　to　judge　them.　You　had　to　take　your　friends　as　they　were,　even　your　enemies.

“So　what　do　you　want　me　to　do？"

“Find　some　of　your　influential　friends　and　have　her　released.　It's　our　opening　night　tomorrow.　What　can　we　do　without　our　star？If　you　can't　get　her　out　of　jail,　you　and　Lotus　Charm　will　have　to　come　and　help　us　out."

“I　can't　do　that,"　Pao　Ching　retorted　firmly.　“I　don't　have　time,　but　I'll　use　my　influence,　if　possible."

Fourth　Master　Tang　was　insistent.　“You　and　Lotus　Charm　must　come　to　help　us.　I　promise　I　won't　let　her　mix　with　the　other　girls.　Please　come."

Pao　Ching　nodded,　wondering　why　he　hadn't　the　courage　to　say　they　would　come　only　if　Lotus　Charm　were　given　top　billing.　She　would　get　it,　he　would　see　to　that.　The　situation　amused　him.　The　idea　of　Lotus　Charm's　getting　top　billing　on　the　Tangs'　opening　night！And　she　would　have　it,　if　he　had　to　write　the　posters　himself.

Lotus　Charm　was　thrilled　at　the　idea.　It　was　the　first　time　she　had　ever　had　top　billing.

After　the　show,　she　held　tightly　to　her　share　which　Fourth　Master　Tang　had　given　her.　She　decided　she　would　give　this　to　her　mother　to　make　her　happy.　Now,　she　had　her　top　billing.　When　she　earned　her　money,　she　would　give　it　to　her　mother　to　see　if　she　would　still　be　cool　and　indifferent　to　her.

She　ran　upstairs　with　the　money　in　her　hand　and　called　as　she　went,　“Mother,　this　is　for　you.　I　earned　this　money　for　you　to　buy　drinks."

Mrs.　Fang　smiled.　On　general　good　principle,　she　never　praised　Lotus　Charm.　But　having　money　for　drink　pleased　her.　“Come　on,"　she　said,　“I'll　let　you　have　a　taste　of　my　drink."　She　dipped　the　chopstick　into　the　wine　cup　and　allowed　the　liquor　to　drip　on　Lotus　Charm's　tongue.

Lotus　Charm　sang　happily　as　she　walked　back　to　her　own　room.　She　undid　her　braids　and　put　her　hair　into　a　bun　at　the　nape　of　her　neck　like　a　grown-up　woman.　She　liked　the　effect　in　the　mirror.　She　decided　that　she　was　grown-up.　Why？Had　she　not　even　pleased　her　mother？She　undressed　and　stood　looking　at　herself　in　the　glass.　Phoenix　Girl　came　as　she　was　sitting　in　bed.　Phoenix　Girl　saw　the　bun　and　laughed.　“What　on　earth　are　you　doing？"　she　queried.





