(6)

I have already pointed out that it is an essential feature of our modern, “capitalistic,” system of production that at any moment a far larger proportion of the available original means of production is employed to provide consumers’ goods for some more or less distant future than is used for the satisfaction of immediate needs. The raison d’être of this way of organizing production is, of course, that by lengthening the production process we are able to obtain a greater quantity of consumers’ goods out of a given quantity of original means of production. It is not necessary for my present purpose to enter at any length into an explanation of this increase of productivity by roundabout methods of production. It is enough to state that within practical limits we may increase the output of consumers’ goods from a given quantity of original means of production indefinitely, provided we are willing to wait long enough for the product. The thing which is of main interest for us is that any such change from a method of production of any given duration to a method which takes more or less time implies quite definite changes in the organization of production, or, as I shall call this particular aspect of organization, to distinguish it from other more familiar aspects, changes in the structure of production. In order to get a clear view of what is actually implied by these changes in the structure of production it is useful to employ a schematic representation.41 For this purpose, I find it convenient to represent the successive applications of the original means of production which are needed to bring forth the output of consumers’ goods accruing at any moment of time, by the hypotenuse of a right-angled triangle, such as the triangle in Fig. 1.





The value of these original means of production is expressed by the horizontal projection of the hypotenuse, while the vertical dimension, measured in arbitrary periods from the top to the bottom, expresses the progress of time, so that the inclination of the line representing the amount of original means of production used means that these original means of production are expended continuously during the whole process of production. The bottom of the triangle represents the value of the current output of consumers’ goods. The area of the triangle thus shows the totality of the successive stages through which the several units of original means of production pass before they become ripe for consumption. It also shows the total amount of intermediate products which must exist at any moment of time in order to secure a continuous output of consumers’ goods. For this reason we may conceive of this diagram not only as representing the successive stages of the production of the output of any given moment of time, but also as representing the processes of production going on simultaneously in a stationary society. To use a happy phrase of J.B. Clark’s, it gives a picture of the “synchronized process of production.”42,43

Now it should be clear without further explanation that the proportion between the amount of intermediate products (represented by the area of the triangle) which is necessary at any moment of time to secure a continuous output of a given quantity of consumers’goods, and the amount of that output,44 must grow with the length of the roundabout process of production. As the average time interval between the application of the original means of production and the completion of the consumers’ goods increases, production becomes more capitalistic, and vice versa. In the case we are contemplating, in which the original means of production are applied at a constant rate throughout the whole process of production, this average time is exactly half as long as the time which elapses between the application of the first unit of original means of production and the completion of the process. Accordingly, the total amount of intermediate products may also be represented by a rectangle half as high as the triangle, as indicated by the dotted line in the diagram. The areas of the two figures are necessarily equal, and it sometimes assists the eye to have a rectangle instead of a triangle when we have to judge the relative magnitude represented by the area of the figure. Furthermore, it should be noticed that, as the figure represents values and not physical production, the surplus return obtained by the roundabout methods of production is not represented in the diagram. In this lecture I have intentionally neglected interest. We shall have to take that into consideration next time; until then we may assume that the intermediate products remain the property of the owners of the original means of production until they have matured into consumers’ goods and are sold to consumers. Interest is then received by the owners of the original means of production together with wages and rent.

