IV

As regards the relationship of the natural or equilibrium rate of interest to the actual rate, it should be noted, in the first place, that even the existence of this distinction is questioned. The objections, however, mainly arise from a misunderstanding that occurred because K. Wicksell, who originated the distinction, made use in his later works of the term “real rate” (which to my mind is less suitable than “natural rate”) and this expression became more widespread than that which we have used.124 The expression “real rate of interest” is also unsuitable, since it coincides with Professor Fisher’s “real interest,”125 which, as is well known, denotes the actual rate plus the rate of appreciation or minus the rate of depreciation of money, and is thus in accordance with common usage, which employs the term “real wages” or “real income” in the same sense. Unfortunately Wicksell’s change in terminology is also linked up with a certain ambiguity in his definition of the “natural rate.” Having correctly defined it once as “that rate at which the demand for loan capital just equals the supply of savings,”126 he redefines it, on another occasion, as that rate which would rule “if there were no money transactions and real capital were lent in natura.”127 If this last definition were correct, Dr. G. Halm128 would be right in raising, against the conception of a “natural rate,” the objection that a uniform rate of interest could develop only in a money economy, so that the whole analysis is irrelevant. If Dr. Halm, instead of clinging to this unfortunate formula, had based his reasoning on the correct definition, which is also to be found in Wicksell, he would have reached the same conclusion as Professor Adolf Weber—the distinguished head of the school of which he is a member: that is, that the natural rate is a conception “which is evolved automatically from any clear study of economic interconnections.”129 In accordance with this view, Wicksell’s conception must be credited with fundamental significance in the study of monetary influences on the economic system; especially if one realizes the practical importance of a money rate of interest depressed below the natural rate by a constantly increasing volume of circulating media. Unfortunately, although Wicksell’s solution cannot be regarded as adequate at all points, the attention it has received since he propounded it has borne no relation to its importance. Apart from the works of Professor Mises, mentioned above, the theory has made no progress at all, although many questions concerning it still await solution.130 This may be due to the fact (on which we have touched already) that the problem had become entangled with that of fluctuations in the general price level. We have already stated our views on this point (pp. 105–06), and indicated what is necessary for the further development of the theory. Here we shall try to restate the problem in its correct form, freed from any reference to movements in the price level.


