Prices and Production (1931, 1935)


First published in London by Routledge and Sons in 1931. The second edition was published by Routledge and Kegan Paul in 1935.

1 “The Pure Theory of Money: A Rejoinder to Mr. Keynes,” Economica (November 1931); “Money and Capital: A Reply to Mr. Sraffa,” Economic Journal (June 1932); “Kapitalaufzehrung,” Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv (July 1932); “A Note on the Development of the Doctrine of ‘Forced Saving’,” Quarterly Journal of Economics (November 1932); “Der Stand und die nächste Zukunft der Konjunkturforschung,” Festschrift für Arthur Spiethoff (Munich: Duncker & Humblot, 1933); “Über neutrales Geld,” Zeitschrift für Nationalökonomie 4 (October 1933); “Capital and Industrial Fluctuations,”Econometrica 2 (April 1934); “On the Relationship between Investment and Output,” Economic Journal (June 1934).

2 Monetary Theory and the Trade Cycle (London: Routledge, 1933) and “The ‘Paradox’ of Saving,” Economica (May 1931); included in this volume.

3 See particularly his Theorie des Geldes und der Umlaufsmittel (Munich: Duncker & Humblot, 1912), first published in 1912 and now fortunately available in an English translation, L. Mises, The Theory of Money (London: Jonathan Cape, 1934). Cf. also my Monetary Theory and the Trade Cycle, which is concerned more with the monetary factors which cause the trade cycle than the present book, which is mainly devoted to the real phenomena which constitute it.

4 This is the formulation of R.G. Hawtrey. Cf. his lecture on “Money and Index Numbers” in the Journal of the Royal Statistical Society 93, part 1 (1930): 65.

5 Ibid., p. 64.

6 Published 1752, republished as part of his Essays Moral, Political and Literary (part 2, essay 4, “Of Money”) which originally appeared in 1742, and therefore are often wrongly quoted with that date.

7 “Essays towards a Solution of the Gold Question,” in Essays in Political Economy, Theoretical and Applied (London: Macmillan, 1873), particularly Essay 2: “The Course of Depreciation.” These Essays were originally published in 1855–60 in Frazers Magazine and the Edinburgh Review. It may be of interest to mention here that Carl Menger who has decisively influenced modern development in this field, was well acquainted with Cairnes’s exposition. Cf. on this point my Introduction to volume 1 of the Collected Works of Carl Menger in the Series of Reprints of Scarce Tracts in Economics (London: London School of Economics, 1934).

8 In order to appreciate the importance of this statement, another passage occurring a little earlier in the same chapter (p. 261) should be consulted. In the course of this passage, Thornton writes: “As soon, however, as the circulating medium ceases to increase, the extra profit is at an end.” (Italics mine.)

9 Substance of two speeches by Henry Thornton, Esq., in the debate in the House of Commons on the report of the Bullion Committee on the 7th and 14th May, 1811 (London, 1811). Cf. particularly p. 19 et seq.

10 Cf. T.E. Gregory, Introduction to Tooke and Newmarch’s History of Prices and of the State of the Circulation, 4 vols. (London: P.S. King, 1928), p. 23. Professor Gregory does not, however, clearly distinguish between the two theories.

11 Thoughts on the Effects of the Bank Restriction (London, 1803), p. 20.

12 An Essay on the Principles of Commercial Exchanges (1804), p. 113.

13 The High Price of Bullion a Proof of the Depreciation of Bank Notes, 3rd ed. (1810), p. 47. Economic Essays, ed. E.K.C. Gonner (London: G. Bell and Sons, 1923), p. 35.

14 “Principles of Political Economy and Taxation,” The Works of David Ricardo, ed. J.R. McCulloch (London: John Murray, 1846), p. 220.

15 Bullion Report, etc., octavo edition (London, 1810), p. 56; ed. Carman (1894), p. 51.

16 In a work entitled Outlines of a System of Political Economy (London: Ridgway and Baldwin, 1823), pp. 62 and 198 et seq.; written with a view to prove to the government and the country that the cause of the present agricultural distress is entirely artificial, and to suggest a plan for the management of currency by which it may be remedied now and any recurrence of similar evils be prevented in the future. This work probably contains also the first exposition of the program later advocated and put into practice by the members of the “Currency School” Joplin’s second work referred to in the text is An Analysis and History of the Currency Question (London: J. Ridway, 1832).

17 Analysis and History, p. 101.

18 Ibid., pp. 108–09. Cf. also pp. 111–13.

19 T. Tooke, An Inquiry into the Currency Principle (London: Smith, Elder, 1844), p. 77.

20 Tooke, Considerations on the State of the Currency (London: John Murray, 1826), p. 22, footnote. As late as 1840 he still reprinted this note in the appendix to the first volume of his History of Prices though not without omitting some important sentences. Cf. Gregory, Introduction, p. 25.

21 Report on the Committee of Secrecy on the Bank of England Charter (London, 1833), p. 18. Q. 191–7.

22 In an anonymous article entitled “Lord King” in the Edinburgh Review (October 1846), later reprinted in N.W. Senior’s Biographical Sketches (London: Longman, Green, 1863). The relevant parts of this article are now all reproduced in Senior’s Industrial Efficiency and Social Economy, ed. S. Leon Levy (New York: Henry Holt, 1928), vol. 2, pp. 117–18.

23 Book 3, chap. 23, para. 4, ed. William James Ashley (London: Longmans Green, 1848), p. 646 et seq.

24 Bentham’s contribution to this problem is discussed in somewhat greater detail in a note by the present author on “The Development of the Doctrine of Forced Saving,” Quarterly Journal of Economics (November 1932) where also an even earlier reference to the problem by H. Thornton and a number of later contributions to the discussion on it are mentioned, which are omitted in the present sketch.

25 Edinburgh Review 17, no. 34 (February 1811): 363 et seq. Cf. also the reply of Ricardo in appendix to the fourth edition of his pamphlet on the High Price of Bullion (1811).

26 Cf. The Collected Works of Dugald Stewart, ed. Sir William Hamilton (London: Longman, Brown, Green, 1855), vol. 8, pp. 440–49. A fuller discussion of D. Stewart’s views on the subject will be found in the note on “The Development of the Doctrine of Forced Saving,” quoted before.

27 Essays on Some Unsettled Questions of Political Economy (London: Parker, 1844), p. 118.

28 Mill, Principles of Political Economy, ed. Ashley, p. 512.

29 An instance of such restatement of earlier doctrine which is somewhat surprising in view of the later opinions of this author, occurs in Adolf Wagner’s early Beiträge zur Lehre von den Banken (Leipzig: Voss, 1857), pp. 236–39.

30 Cf. J.W. Angell, The Theory of International Prices (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1926), p. 117 et seq.

31 Léon Walras, Théorie Mathématique du Billet de Banque (1879); reprinted in Études d’Économie Politique Appliqué (Lausanne and Paris, 1898).

32 Wicksell’s first and most important exposition of this doctrine is in his Geldzins und Güterpreise (German edition; Jena: Gustav Fischer, 1898), which should be consulted together with Wicksell’s later restatement in the second volume of his Vorlesungen über Nationalökonomie (Jena: Gustav Fischer, 1922).

33 Sometimes also the “normal” (p. 111) or “real” rate of interest. This latter form of expression has given rise to a confusion with a different theory concerning the influence of an expectation of price changes on the rate, which is commonly associated with the name of Fisher, but which, as mentioned before, was already known to Thornton, Ricardo, and Marshall.

34 Geldzins und Güterpreise, pp. 102, 143.

35 Theorie des Geldes und der Umlaufsmittel (1912). Simultaneously with Professor Mises a distinguished Italian economist, Professor Marco Fanno, made in an exceedingly interesting and now very rare book on Le Banche e il Mercato Monetario (Rome: Athenaeum, 1913), an independent attempt to develop Wicksell’s theory further. A revised shorter German version of the views of this author is now available in his contribution to the Beiträge zur Geldtheorie (Vienna: Springer, 1933).

Considerable elements of Professor Mises’s theory and particularly the doctrine of “Forced Saving” seem to have been introduced into America through Professor Schumpeter’s Theorie der Wirtschaftlichen Entwicklung (Munich: Duncker & Humblot, 1911) and Dr. B.M. Anderson’s Value of Money (New York: Macmillan, 1917) and gained considerable vogue since. In any case, since the publication of this book in 1917, “Forced Saving” has been discussed by Professors F.W. Taussig, Principles of Economics, 3rd ed. (New York: Harper & Row, 1915), pp. 351, 359; F. Knight, Risk, Uncertainty and Profit (New York: Houghton Mifflin, 1921), p. 166, note and Index; D. Friday, Profit, Wages and Prices (New York: Harcourt, Brace, 1921), pp. 216–17; and A.H. Hansen Cycles of Prosperity and Depression (Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1921), pp. 104–06. Whether the American author whose views on these problems comes nearest to those expressed in the present book, Mr. M.W. Watkins, whose exceedingly interesting article on “Commercial Banking and the Formation of Capital,” Journal of Political Economy, 27 (1919), I have only recently become acquainted with, is indebted to the same source I do not know.

In England similar ideas seem to have been developed independently, first by Professor Pigou, Is Unemployment Inevitable? (London: Macmillan, 1925), pp. 100–11 and then in much greater detail by Mr. D.H. Robertson, Banking Policy and the Price Level (London: P.S. King, 1926), passim.

36 From now onward the term “amount of money in circulation” or even shortly “the quantity of money” will he used for what should more exactly be described as the effective money stream or the amount of money payments made during a unit period of time. The problems arising out of possible divergences between these two magnitudes will only be taken up in Lecture 4.

37 I have dealt more fully with the difficult question of the conditions of intertemporal equilibrium of exchange in an article “Das intertemporale Gleichgewichtsystem der Preise und die Bewegungen des ‘Geldwertes’,” Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv 28 (1928).

38 Cf. the Appendix to Lecture 4.

39 Business Cycles: The Problem and Its Setting (New York: National Bureau of Economic Research, 1927), p. 462.

40 I have dealt more fully with the relation between pure economic theory and the explanation of business fluctuations in my book, Monetary Theory and the Trade Cycle, chaps. 1 and 2.

41 The following diagrams were originally the result of an attempt to replace the somewhat clumsy tables of figures, used for the same purpose in my “‘Paradox’ of Saving,” by a more easily grasped form of representation. Later I noticed that similar triangular figures had been used as representations of the capitalistic process of production not only by W.S. Jevons, Theory of Political Economy, 4th ed. (London: Macmillan, 1911), pp. 230–07, but particularly also by K. Wicksell, Lectures on Political Economy (New York: Macmillan, 1935), vol. 1, p. 152 et seq., and, following him, G. Akerman, Realkapital und Kapitalzins, part 1 (Stockholm, 1923). Dr. Marschak has recently made the very appropriate suggestion to designate these triangular figures as the “Jevonian Investment Figures.”

42 The methodological bearing of the concept of a synchronized production is particularly well brought out by Hans Mayer in his article “Produktion,” Handwörterbuch der Staatswissenschaften, 4th ed., vol. 6 (Jena: Gustav Fischer, 1925), p. 1115 et seq.

43 So long as we confine ourselves to the real aspects of the capital structure, the triangular figures may be taken to represent not only the stock of goods in process but also the stock of durable instruments existing at any moment of time. The different installments of future services which such goods are expected to render will in that case have to be imagined to belong to different “stages” of production corresponding to the time interval which will elapse before these services mature. (For a more detailed discussion of the problems arising out of the two different aspects, of actual duration of production and the durability of goods, in which time enters in the productive process, cf. my article “On the Relationship between Investment and Output,” Economic Journal [June 1934].) But as soon as the diagrammatic representations are used to show the successive transfers of the intermediate products from stage to stage in exchange for money, it becomes evidently impossible to treat durable goods in the same way as goods in process, since it is impossible to assume that the individual services embodied in any durable goods will regularly change hands as they approach a stage nearer to the moment when they will actually be consumed. For this reason, it has been necessary, as has been pointed out in the preface, to abstract from the existence of durable goods so long as the assumption is made that the total stock of intermediate products as it gradually proceeds toward the end of the process of production is exchanged against money at regular intervals.

44 It would be more exact to compare the stock of intermediate products existing at a moment of time not with the output of consumers’ goods during a period of time, but rather with the rate at which consumers’ goods mature at the same moment of time. Since, however, this output at a moment of time would be infinitely small, that proportion could only be expressed as a differential quotient of a function which represents the flow of intermediate products at the point where this flow ends, i.e., where the intermediate products become consumers’ goods. This relationship is essentially the same as that between the total quantity of water in a stream and the rate at which this water passes the mouth of this stream. (This simile seems to be more appropriate than the more familiar one which considers capital as a “stock” and only income as a “flow.” Cf. on this point N.J. Polak, Grundzüge der Finanzierung [Berlin, 1926], p. 13.) It is convenient to treat the quantity of intermediate products at any point of this stream as a function of time f(t) and accordingly the total quantity of intermediate products in the stream, as an integral of this function over a period r equal to the total length of the process of production. If we apply this to any process of production beginning at the moment x, the total quantity of intermediate products in the stream will be expressed by , and the output of consumers’ goods at a moment of time by f(x+r). In the diagrams used in the text, the function f(t) is represented by the hypotenuse, its concrete value f(x+r) by the horizontal side and the integral by the area of the triangle. There is of course no reason to assume that the function f(t) will be linear, i.e., that the amount of original factors applied during successive stages of the process is constant, as is assumed in the diagrams. On these and some connected points, see the article on “Investment and Output,” quoted in the preceding footnote.

45 Cf. M.W. Holtrop, De Omloopssnelheid van het Geld (Amsterdam: H.J. Paris, 1928), p. 181.

46 Wealth of Nations, book 2, chap. 1, ed. E. Cannan (London: Methuen, 1904), p. 305. It is interesting to note that this statement of Adam Smith is referred to by Thomas Tooke as a justification of the erroneous doctrines of the Banking School. Cf. An Inquiry into the Currency Principle, p. 71.

47 Cf. W.T. Foster and W. Catchings, Profits, Publications of the Pollak Foundation for Economic Research, No. 8 (Boston and New York: Houghton Mifflin, 1925), and a number of other books by the same authors and published in the same series. For a detailed criticism of their doctrines, cf. my article, “The ‘Paradox’ of Saving.”

48 J.S. Mill’s emphasis on the “perpetual consumption and reproduction of capital,” like most of his other penetrating, but often somewhat obscurely expressed observations on capital, has not had the deserved effect, although it directs attention to the essential quality of capital which distinguishes it from other factors of its production. More recently the misplaced emphasis which some authors, particularly Professors J.B. Clark, J. Schumpeter, and F.H. Knight, have put on the tautological statement that so long as stationary conditions prevail capital is ex definitione permanent, has further contributed to obscure the problem.

49 I am deliberately discussing here the “strong case” where saving implies a reduction in the demand for all consumers’ goods, although this is a highly unlikely case to occur in practice, since it is in this case that many people find it so difficult to understand how a general decrease in the demand for consumers’ goods should lead to an increase of investment. Where, as will regularly be the case, the reduction in the demand for consumers’ goods affects only a few kinds of such goods, these special difficulties would, of course, be absent.

50 To avoid misunderstandings I have now substituted the terms “earlier” and “later” stages used by Professor Taussig in this connection, for the expression “higher” and “lower,” which are unequivocal only with reference to the diagrams but are liable to be confused with such expressions as “highly finished” products, particularly as A. Marshall has used the terms in this reverse sense (cf. Industry and Trade [London: Macmillan, 1919], p. 219).

51 It is important to bear in mind that, though the total money income would diminish, the total real income would increase.

52 It should, however, be remembered that a process cannot be regarded as completed in this sense, just because an entrepreneur at any one stage of production has succeeded in completing his section of it. A complete process, in the sense in which this concept is used in the text, comprises all the stages of any one line of production, whether they are part of one firm or divided between several. I have further elaborated this point in my article on “Capital and Industrial Fluctuations.”

53 Even if this total of goods moving toward consumption during each period is not actually exchanged against money in each period, it is not an imaginary, but a real and important magnitude, since the value of this total is a magnitude which continually rests within our power to determine. It probably stands in close relation to what is commonly called free capital, and it is certainly the supply of this factor which—together with new saving—determines the rate of interest; the capital which remains invested in durable instruments affects the interest rate from the demand side only, i.e., by influencing opportunities for new investment.

54 As has already been mentioned in the first lecture, the effects of a divergence between the money rate and the equilibrium rate of interest on relative prices were originally briefly discussed by Professor Mises. On the actual working of the price mechanism which brings about the changes in the structure of production, his work contains, however, hardly more than the sentences quoted at the beginning of this lecture. It seems that most people have found them difficult to understand and that they have remained completely unintelligible to all who were not very familiar with Böhm-Bawerk’s theory of interest, on which they are based. The main difficulty lies in Professor Mises’s short statement that the rise of the prices of consumers’ goods is the cause of the crisis, while it seems natural to assume that this would rather make production more profitable. This is the main point which I have here tried to clear up. So far, the most exhaustive previous exposition of these interrelationships, which anticipates in some points what is said in the following pages, is to be found in R. Strigl, “Die Produktion unter dem Einfluss einer Kreditexpansion,” Schriften des Vereins für Sozialpolitik 173, no. 2 (Munich, 1928), esp. p. 203 et seq. More recently, Professor Strigl has further developed his views on the subject in a book, Kapital und Produktion (Vienna: Springer, 1934). Some references to earlier anticipations of the ideas developed in this lecture will now be found in an additional note at the end of this lecture.

55 Since the publication of the first edition of this book my attention has been drawn to the fact that this distinction is clearly implied in some of Böhm-Bawerk’s discussions of these problems. Cf. his Positive Theorie des Kapitalzinses, 3rd ed. (Jena: Gustav Fischer, 1921), pp. 195 and 199.

56 This class will, in particular, comprise most of the goods which at one and the same time belong to different stages. “Of course,” says Marshall (Principles of Economics, 1st ed. [London: Macmillan, 1891], p. 109n.),

	a good many belong to several orders at the same time. For instance, a railway train may be carrying people on a pleasure excursion, and so far it is a good of the first order; if it happens to be carrying at the same time some tins of biscuits, some milling machinery and some machinery that is used for making milling machinery, it is at the same time a good of the second, third and fourth order.

	In cases like this a transfer of its services from a later to an earlier stage (or, to use Menger’s terminology, from a lower to a higher order) is, of course, particularly easy. A plant manufacturing equipment for the production of consumers’ goods as well as for the production of further machinery will sometimes be used mainly for the former and sometimes mainly for the latter purpose.



57 Cf. Friedrich von Wieser, Social Economics, trans. A. Ford Hinrichs (New York: Adelphi, 1927), book 1, chap. 15.

58 This lengthening of the structure of production need, however, by no means takes exclusively or even mainly the form that the methods used in any individual line of production are changed. The increased prices in the earlier stages of production (the lowered rate of interest) will favor production in the lines using much capital and lead to their expansion at the expense of the lines using less capital. In this way the aggregate length of the investment structure of society might in the extreme case take place without a change of the method employed in any one line of production.

59 At this point the simile becomes liable to mislead and it is important to keep in mind all the time that the “fan” refers to price relationships only, but that the length of the structure of production will move in the reverse direction compared with the width of the fan. When the price fan opens, the structure of production is shortened, and vice versa.

60 As I have tried to show in another place (“Capital and Industrial Fluctuations,” p. 164) it is even conceivable, although highly unlikely to occur in practice, that hoarding of money income before spent on consumers’ goods, might give rise to some additional investment.

61 For a fuller discussion of the reasons why this process of expansion must ultimately come to an end, whether the banks are restricted by reserve regulations, etc., or not, and of some of the points alluded to in the next paragraphs, see my article on “Capital and Industrial Fluctuations,” p. 161.

62 The reason for this asymmetry between a transition to longer processes of production, which need not bring about any of these peculiar disturbances, and a transition to shorter processes, which will regularly be accompanied by a crisis, will perhaps become more evident if it is considered that in the former case there will necessarily be time to amortize the capital invested in the existing structure before the new process is completed, while in the latter case this will evidently be impossible and therefore a loss of capital and a reduction of income inevitable. (In all these discussions it is assumed that technical knowledge remains the same; a shortening of the structure of production which is due to technical progress has an altogether different significance from that due to an increase of consumption.)

63 Cf. the very similar example now given by C. Landauer, Planwirtschaft und Verkehrswirtschaft (Leipzig: Duncker & Humblot, 1931), p. 47.

64 Condy Raguet, A Treatise on Currency and Banking (London: Grigg & Elliot, 1839), p. 62 et seq.

65 James Wilson, Capital, Currency and Banking (London: The Economist, 1847), articles 11, 13, and 16, particularly p. 152 et seq.; articles 1, 13, and 17 in the second edition (London: D.M. Aird, 1859).

66 T.S. Ashton, “Economic and Social Investigations in Manchester, 1833–1933,” A Centenary History of the Manchester Statistical Society (London: P.S. King & Son, 1934), p. 72 et seq.

67 W.S. Jevons, A Serious Fall in the Value of Gold Ascertained and its Social Effects set Forth (London: Edward Stanford, 1863), p. 10, in the reprint in the Investigations in Currency and Finance (London: Macmillan, 1884), p. 28.

68 Bonamy Price discussed these problems on numerous occasions. Cf. however, particularly his Chapters on Practical Political Economy (London: Kegan Paul, 1878), pp. 110–24.

69 On these authors, cf. E. v. Bergmann, Geschichte der nationalökonomischen Krisentheorien (Stuttgart: Kohlhammer, 1895), where the reader will find references to still further authors belonging to the same category.

70 Yves Guyot, La Science Économique, English translation, Principles of Social Economy (London: Sonnenschein, 1884), p. 249.

71 That there is no harm in prices falling as productivity increases has been pointed out again and again, e.g., by A. Marshall, N.G. Pierson, W. Lexis, F.Y. Edgeworth, F.W. Taussig, L. Mises, A.C. Pigou, D.H. Robertson, and G. Haberler. (For more detailed references see my article on “The ‘Paradox’ of Saving,” p. 179.) Cf. also the stabilization proposal made by Dr. Maurice Leven, mentioned by W.J. King in the Journal of the American Statistical Association (March 1928), supplement, p. 146, and the article by R.G. Hawtrey “Money and Index Numbers.”

72 In the article, “Das intertemporale Gleichgewichtssystem der Preise und die Bewegungen des ‘Geldwertes’.”

73 Economic Journal 38 (December 1929): 589.

74 Industrial Fluctuations, 2nd ed. (London: Macmillan, 1929), p. 101.

75 For a more detailed discussion of this problem, see my article “Das intertemporale Gleichgewichtsystem der Preise und die Bewegungen des ‘Geldwertes’,” sect. 12.

76 This confusion is particularly obvious in the writings of Thomas Tooke. Cf. T.E. Gregory, introduction to Tooke and Newarch’s A History of Prices and the State of the Circulation (London: P.S. King, 1928), p. 87 et seq.

77 On this point, see, however, the recent discussion by F. Machlup, Börsenkredit, Industriekredit und Kapitalbildung (Vienna: Springer, 1931), particularly chaps. 8 and 9.

78 John Fullarton, On the Regulation of Currencies, 2nd ed. (London: John Murray, 1845), p. 206.

79 Cf. L. v. Mises, Theorie des Geldes und der Umlaufsmittel, 2nd ed. (Munich and Leipzig: Duncker & Humblot, 1924), p. 3 et seq.

80 Mill, Principles of Political Economy, book 3, chap. 7, para. 3, ed. Ashley, p. 488.

81 J.G. Koopmans, “Zum Problem des ‘Neutralen’ Geldes,” in Beiträge zur Geldtheorie, ed. F.A. Hayek (Vienna: Springer, 1933).

82 Walter G. Behrens, Das Geldschöpfungsproblem (Jena: Gustav Fischer, 1928), particularly pp. 228, 286, 312 et seq.

83 Cf. F. v. Wieser, “Der Geldwert und seine Veränderungen,” Zeitschrift für Volkswirtschaft, Sozialpolitik und Verwaltung 13 (1904), p. 54, also reprinted in the same author’s Gesammelte Abhandlungen (Tübingen: Mohr, 1929), p. 178.

84 Reprinted from Econometrica 2, no. 2 (April 1934).

85 A. Hansen and H. Tout, “Annual Survey of Business Cycle Theory: Investment and Saving in Business Cycle Theory,” Econometrica 1, no. 2 (April 1933).

86 The reasons which make a curvilinear triangle of the kind shown in the text a more appropriate representation than the simplified form used in Lecture 2 are probably obvious. See p. 228.

87 A top-heavy structure of this kind is, therefore, an uncompleted structure in the sense that its earlier stages will be permanently employed only after they have helped to increase the equipment in later stages to such a magnitude that its replacement demand will fully use the capacity of the earlier stages. (The essential thing here, however, is not capacity in a technical sense, but sufficient employment to make amortization of plant at current prices possible.)

88 “The Mobility of Capital,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 46 (1932).

89It is assumed here that the construction of this additional plant for making the equipment in question can be carried out either with the help of similar plant already in existence, or of some other plant which can also be used to produce equipment for later stages. This, of course, will always be the case since no capital is created without the help of some capital already in existence, which if it is a question of adding an earlier stage of production to those already existing, must, ex definitione, mean that these capital goods have hitherto been used in later stages. It may be mentioned here, since this has occasionally been a cause of confusion, that any given capital good need not, and usually will not, belong to any one given “stage” of production only. If it is used to produce other capital goods employed in different stages, and still more if it helps to produce durable goods, or is itself durable, it belongs to as many different “stages” as different periods of time elapse from the moment in which we consider it, to the moments when the different final products which it has helped to produce are consumed. This, however, so far from making the concept of stages useless, is only a necessary distinction in order to explain the different ways in which the value of individual capital goods will be affected by changes in the supply of capital, the rate of interest, or other factors affecting the structure of production.

90 I am compelled here—as I was in the preceding lecture—to speak, for the sake of brevity, in terms of competition between the producers of intermediate products and the producers of consumers’ goods (the present and future goods of Böhm-Bawerk’s exposition) instead of speaking more correctly of competition between a continuous range of entrepreneurs in all “stages” of production, which leads to all original factors being invested for a shorter or longer average period.

91 “Stand und Zukunftsaufgaben der Konjunkturforschung,” p. 110.

92 This fact is partly realized by the authors who, however, seem to underestimate its importance, mainly because they think only of the effects of a change in the distribution of income; and while this is obviously the only factor which will affect new savings, the total supply of free capital depends even more on turnover or amortization of existing capital. Any change in that stock of existing capital, brought about by monetary causes, will, by means of the consequent redistribution of the command over resources, tend to affect the relative demand for producers’ and consumers’ goods. If the monetary causes have led to a destruction of capital, this change will necessarily be permanent. If they have led to the creation of additional capital goods, the effect on relative demand may be, at least to some extent, permanently to increase the relative demand for capital goods.

93 Cf. “Stand und Zukunftsaufgaben der Konjunkturforschung,” my contribution to the Festschrift für Arthur Spiethoff.

94 It is a curious fact that the discussion of the supposedly different effect of changes in the relative demand which are due to changes in the supply of money leads the two authors to argue—in effect, if not explicitly, and on what seems to me to be wrong grounds—what they had previously denied, namely that capital accumulated by means of “forced saving” will not be permanent. If it were true that when, after a change in the supply of money, “equilibrium is finally established, the relation (between the prices of consumers’ goods and the prices of producers’ goods) will be found unaltered unless the effects of the transition period have been such as to change permanently the time preference of the income receivers” (p. 143), then, no doubt, the greater part of the real capital created by means of forced saving would be lost. But I think it will be clear by now why I should be very reluctant to use this argument in defense of my position.

Messrs. Hansen and Tout think that such a permanent change in the time preference of the income receivers “is not unlikely, since an increase or decrease in money supply is likely to increase the real income of the community.” This seems to show conclusively that what they have in mind is not the effect on the quantity and distribution of resources, but on individual time preferences.





