(6)

Before following the more modern development of this theory, I must, however, trace the origins of the second strand of thought which in the end became interwoven with the one just considered to constitute modern doctrine in this matter. While the line of thought we have already considered pays attention only to the relation between the rate of interest, the amount of money in circulation and, as a necessary consequence of the latter, the general price level, the second pays attention to the influence which an increase in the amount of money exercises upon the production of capital, either directly or through the rate of interest. The theory that an increase of money brings about an increase of capital, which has recently become very popular under the name of “forced saving,” is even older than the one we have just been considering.

The first author clearly to state this doctrine and the one who elaborated it in greater detail than any of his successors up to very recent times was J. Bentham. In a passage of his Manual of Political Economy written in 1804 but not published until 1843, he deals in some detail with the phenomenon which he calls “Forced Frugality.” By this he means the increased “addition to the mass of future wealth” which a government can bring about by applying funds raised by taxation or the creation of paper money to the production of capital goods. But interesting and important as this discussion by Bentham is, and although it is more than probable that it was known to some of the economists of this circle, the fact that it appeared in print only so many years later reduces its importance for the development of the doctrine very much.24

The honor of first having discussed the problem in some detail in print is apparently due to T.R. Malthus, who, in 1811, in an unsigned review25 of Ricardo’s first pamphlet, introduces his remarks with the complaint that no writer he is acquainted with “has ever seemed sufficiently aware of the influence which a different distribution of the circulating medium of the country must have on those accumulations which are destined to facilitate future production.” He then demonstrates on an assumed “strong case” that a change of the proportion between capital and revenue to the advantage of capital so “as to throw the produce of the country chiefly in the hands of the productive classes” would have the effect that “in a short time, the produce of the country would be greatly augmented.” The next paragraph must be quoted in full. He writes:


Whenever, in the actual state of things, a fresh issue of notes comes into the hands of those who mean to employ them in the prosecution and extension of profitable business, a difference in the distribution of the circulating medium takes place, similar in kind to that which has been last supposed; and produces similar, though of course comparatively inconsiderable effects, in altering the proportion between capital and revenue in favour of the former. The new notes go into the market as so much additional capital, to purchase what is necessary for the conduct of the concern. But, before the produce of the country has been increased, it is impossible for one person to have more of it, without diminishing the shares of some others. This diminution is affected by the rise of prices, occasioned by the competition of the new notes, which puts it out of the power of those who are only buyers, and not sellers, to purchase as much of the annual produce as before: While all the industrious classes—all those who sell as well as buy—are, during the progressive rise of prices, making unusual profits; and, even when this progression stops, are left with the command of a greater portion of the annual produce than they possessed previous to the new issues.




The recognition of this tendency of an increased issue of notes to increase the national capital does not blind Malthus to the dangers and manifest injustice connected with it. He simply offers it, he says, as a rational explanation of the fact that a rise of prices is generally found conjoined with public prosperity.

With a single exception this suggestion of Malthus does not seem to have been appreciated at the time—though the mere fact that Ricardo replied to it at length should have made it familiar to economists. The exception is a series of memoranda on the Bullion Report which Dugald Stewart prepared in 1811 for Lord Lauderdale and which were later reprinted as an appendix to his lectures on political economy.26 Objecting to the oversimplified version of the quantity theory employed in the reasoning of the Bullion Report, he attempts to explain the more “indirect connection between the high prices and an increased circulating medium.” In the course of this discussion he comes very near to the argument employed by Malthus and in one of the later memoranda actually refers to the article which in the meantime had come to his notice, and reproduces the paragraph quoted above.

There are further allusions to the problem by other authors of the early nineteenth century, notably by T. Joplin and R. Torrens, and John Stuart Mill in the fourth of his Essays on Some Unsettled Questions of Political Economy—“On Profits and Interest”—(written in 1829 or 1830) goes at least so far as to mention that, as the result of the activity of bankers, “revenue” may be “converted into capital; and thus, strange as it may appear, the depreciation of the currency, when effected in this way, operates to a certain extent as a forced accumulation.”27

But he believed then that this phenomenon belonged to the “further anomalies of the rate of interest which have not, so far as we are aware, been hitherto brought within the pale of exact science.” The first edition of his Principles seems to contain nothing on this point. But in 1865, in the sixth edition, he added to his chapter on “Credit as a Substitute for Money” a footnote which so closely resembles the statement by Malthus that it seems very probable that something—perhaps the publications of D. Stewart’s Collected Works—had directed his attention to the earlier discussion of the point.28

