II

Any lengthening of the process of production can only be completed over a period of time corresponding to the interval between the moment when the factors which are being shifted to an earlier stage are being invested, and the moment when their product matures. If the new, longer process is to be completed and maintained, this requires not only that the investment in the earlier stage must be constantly maintained, but also (except in a few rare cases, like the aging of wine and the growing of trees) that further complementary investments must be made in the later stages.

From this it follows that, in any progressive society, the particular forms in which investments are being made are determined by the expectation that, for some time to come, a similar stream of funds for investment will be forthcoming; and that, at any moment of time, only a fraction of the funds available for new investment will be used to start new processes, while the rest will be required to complete the processes already under way. On the simplifying assumption that the total length of the marginal processes which are made possible by an increase in the supply of investable funds, is always greater than the total length of any process already used, this situation can be represented by the following diagram. The curvilinear86 triangle ABC represents, in the same way as the triangle I have used in the preceding lectures, the stock of capital belonging to processes already completed. (The area of the curvilinear triangle AB'C' shows the stock of capital before the additions were begun.) The fully drawn stripes, beginning between C and D, represent incomplete processes started at different moments in the past—and now in different stages of completion. The part of these stripes which is dotted represents the additional investment which is required to complete the processes. During every successive period of investment, part of the fund available will be used to start new processes, part to advance processes which are already under way, and part to complete the most advanced processes.





If at any moment savings fall by no more than had previously been used to start new processes, the completion of the processes already under way will not be endangered. And since, at any moment, some of the unfinished processes will be completed, the amount of saving may continually fall off at a certain rate, and may reach zero at the moment when all the processes under way are completed. There is, therefore, at any moment, a maximum rate at which the rate of saving may fall off, without interfering with the new processes already started. It is only when the decrease in saving is faster than this rate, at which the need for capital for the purpose of completing processes under way decreases, that the incomplete structure cannot be completed and some of the investments made in the earlier stages have to be abandoned.

Such an abandonment of early stages will, of course, mean that the average period for which the current supply of original factors is being invested, is shortened even if, at the same time, a good deal of investment in new forms in later stages is taking place. In this case, however, investment in new forms need not mean net investment, since the losses on the abandoned earlier stages have to be offset against it.


