VIII

It will be impossible within the compass of this article to discuss the further points made by Messrs. Hansen and Tout in the same orbit as those more fundamental problems already taken up. Particularly, the next and very important point as to the effect of an expansion of consumers’ demand at a time when the productive forces are not fully employed, and banks are in a position to expand credits to producers, could be answered completely only in connection with a fully developed theory of the process going on during a depression. But, if it be assumed that these two conditions exist as a consequence of a preceding crisis (and a definite assumption as regards the reason why these conditions exist is essential for any answer), and if the explanation of the crisis which I have just discussed is accepted, it is difficult to see how the same phenomenon, which has brought about the crisis, i.e., the rise in the relative demand for consumers’ goods, should also be the cure for it. The scarcity of capital, which, of course, is nothing else but the relatively high price of consumers’ goods, could only be enhanced by giving the consumers more money to spend on final products. At least so long as there are no further monetary complications, particularly so long as it is not assumed that the expectation of a further fall in prices has led to hoarding, I see no way of getting over this difficulty. But before I proceed to the relation between these secondary monetary complications, and the underlying real maladjustments which have caused it, I must try to clear away what seems to me to be a confusion which has led Messrs. Hansen and Tout to apply their denial of the capital-destroying effect of additions to consumers’ credits not only to the peculiar situation of an advanced depression but also generally.

The essence of the confusion on this point seems to me to lie in the contrast which my critics try to establish in several places between what they call “nominal” changes in the relative monetary demand for consumers’ goods and producers’ goods, and the “real changes in the demand for consumers’ goods occasioned by a fundamental modification in time preference for present and future goods.” It seems to me that to assume that this rate of time preference can have any effect other than through the relative demand for these two classes of goods, or can have any immediate effects different from those of any other cause affecting that relative demand, is an attempt to establish a purely mystical connection. The mere fact that even without a monetary change, any change in the distribution of the command over existing resources will under a given set of individual time preferences lead to quite different proportions between capital and income, should suffice to make this quite clear.92

Nor can I see how the two authors can combine their acceptance of the idea that forced saving can be brought about by monetary causes, without a change in the rate of time preference, with a general denial that monetary causes may also lead to “forced dis-saving.” In principle, any change in the relative demand for the two categories of goods, whether brought about by actual shifts of monetary demand from one to the other, or merely by unilateral increases or decreases without corresponding changes on the other side, will tend to lead to corresponding changes in the relative amounts produced. The differences between these two cases (a shift and a unilateral change) are, first, that the shift of an amount of money from the demand for consumers’ goods to the demand for producers’ goods changes the proportion between the two much more effectively than a mere unilateral increase or decrease by the same amount; and, second, that the changes in the quantity of money, which are implied in the second type of change, will lead to further changes which may counteract or offset the tendency created by the change in relative demand. This will be particularly true if a change in relative demand is accompanied by an absolute reduction in demand and if, at the same time, costs (i.e., the prices of the original factors of production) are rigid. In this case, deflationary tendencies are likely to set in, which may more than counterbalance the effect of the changed relative demand. But, in spite of these further complications which seem likely to arise, the principle seems to me to be true, and to comprise even what seems to Messrs. Hansen and Tout a reductio ad absurdum of the argument, namely that a unilateral decrease in the demand for consumers’ goods may lead to a lengthening of the structure of production. Although I fully admit that, because of the probable complications, this case is very unlikely to materialize, I do not think that it is entirely impractical. Would Messrs. Hansen and Tout deny that, e.g., increased hoarding on the part of a class of very small rentiers who reduced their consumption of agricultural products, might not lead, via the reduction of wages, first in agriculture and then generally, to an increase in the real quantity of labor corresponding to a constant amount of money invested in industry, and therefore of capital?


