2. CRITERIA OF CONSCIOUSNESS


6.8. What, then, are those special attributes of conscious behaviour by which we distinguish it from behaviour which also appears to be co-ordinated and purposive but of which the acting person is not ‘aware’? Such unconscious behaviour may occur either because the person’s attention is at the particular moment otherwise engaged, or because he is altogether unconscious as is the case in some somnambulic states and hypnotic trances. There appear to exist three prima facie differences between such unconscious and conscious behaviour which we may provisionally describe by saying that in conscious behaviour a person will, (a) be able to ‘give an account’ of what he is or has been doing, (b) be able ‘to take account’ in his actions of other simultaneous experiences of which he is also conscious, and, (c) be guided to a large extent not only by his current perceptions but also by images and reproduction of circumstances which might be evoked by the existing situation.

6.9. When we say that a person is able to ‘give an account’ of his mental processes we mean by this that he is able to communicate them to other people by means of ‘symbols’, that is by actions which, when perceived by other people, will occupy in their mental order a position analogous to that which they occupy in his own; and which, in consequence, will have for those other persons a meaning similar to that which it possesses for him.

6.10. The possibility of such communication between different persons is not only indicative of the presence of consciousness but the symbolisms employed for that purpose may also be an important factor which helps to raise the discrimination to that higher degree of clarity and precision which distinguishes conscious experience. The connexions between sensory impulses and the highly developed apparatus of expression which man possesses undoubtedly greatly extend the means of classification available to him, and they are probably of the greatest importance in making abstract thought possible. They are also especially important because, in learning the system of symbols developed by his race, the individual can utilize, in ordering his current experience, not only his own experience but in some measure also the experience of his race.

6.11. But although communication (or at least communication by language proper, as distinguished from communication by gestures, facial expression, etc.) will as a rule be the result of conscious processes and ‘give an account’ of such processes, this means no more than that communication, being normally itself conscious action, is connected with (or can be influenced by) all other conscious processes. As a criterion of consciousness the possibility of ‘giving an account’ of conscious processes is therefore no more than a special instance of the second of the three criteria mentioned before, namely, of the fact that in conscious action we can ‘take account’ of all other processes which are also conscious.

6.12. The same applies to another supposed criterium of consciousness which is often mentioned but to which we have not yet referred, namely, to the fact that conscious experience can be remembered and will be recognized as already experienced before when they occur again. ‘Memory’ or ‘recognition’ means here no more than the reappearance in consciousness, in combination with circumstances with which it has become associated, of what has been consciously experienced before. This is not a helpful criterium, if for no other reason so because it seems to be the case that we can sometimes in this manner ‘remember’ sense experiences of which we were not aware at the time when they first occurred. Moreover, memory in the general sense of learning clearly occurs also on pre-conscious levels.3 With regard to conscious events the possibility of remembering or recognizing them thus means no more than that events which have occurred within the sphere of consciousness may do so again, but it tells us nothing about how conscious phenomena differ from non-conscious ones. All that it suggests is that in some sense all conscious phenomena belong to a common sphere, so that any conscious experience may appear in the company of any other .

6.13. The possibility of ‘giving an account of’ and of ‘remembering’ conscious events therefore merely leads us to that specially close connexion between all events which are at the same time conscious which before we have described by saying that in conscious processes a person will be able to ‘take account’ of other events which are conscious at the same time.

6.14. This close connexion between all conscious events, often described as the ‘unity of the consciousness’, can be regarded as a distinguishing attribute of conscious events, since the same does not seem to apply to unconscious mental events. While such unconscious mental processes which occur at the same time may also affect each other, this is not necessarily always the case. Even when they take place at the same time, they may proceed largely independently of each other (possibly in different subcentres) and without affecting each other’s course. In other words, there is more than one ‘unconsciousness’ (or coherent system of unconscious mental events) while there exists (normally) in any individual only one consciousness.

6.15. Another familiar fact which is connected with this ‘unity of the consciousness’ may be mentioned here. This is the so-called ‘narrowness of the consciousness’, or the fact that, at any one time, only a limited range of experience can be fully conscious. Though the focus of consciousness may rapidly shift from one object to another, this often seems to mean that processes which have been fully conscious may temporarily recede into a semiconscious or subconscious condition and persist there, ready to spring again into full consciousness at any moment.





