4. ATTENTION


6.22. Before we can attempt a more definite characterization of the peculiar attributes of conscious experience, it will be necessary to consider another phenomenon which is so closely related to consciousness that it must be regarded as little more than a specially high degree of awareness. This is ‘attention’.4 Our awareness of events to which we ‘give our attention’ certainly differs from that of other events of which we are merely co-conscious very much in the same manner in which the latter differ from conscious experiences.

6.23. The experiences to which our attention is directed are more fully discriminated and perceived in greater detail than others of which we are also aware. They stand out altogether more clearly than those which occupy merely the fringe of consciousness. We notice more in them and are more fully prepared to respond adequately to their occurrence.

6.24. At the same time, it is characteristic of attention that it has these effects only with regard to events which are in some sense expected or anticipated, and that, however attentive we may endeavour to be, an altogether unexpected event will take us as much by surprise and escape as much our detailed notice as if we had not been attentive at all. Attention is thus always directed,5 or confined to a particular class of events for which we are on the look-out and which, in consequence, we perceive with greater distinctness when one of them occurs.

6.25. These characteristic attributes of attention fit readily into our account of the process of perception. Events or objects whose probable occurrence is suggested by the perceptions or images of which we are aware will form part of the following of these experiences. The corresponding physiological following will therefore be in a state of excitatory preparedness, and this will facilitate the evaluation of any of the corresponding stimuli should they actually occur. The excitation produced by any such stimulus will as a result penetrate further, the network of relations determining its position will be more extensively activated, and the sensory impulse will therefore be more completely discriminated.

6.26. The fact that the following of certain impulses or groups of impulses, or certain parts of this following, will be more completely activated because the new impulses will be supported by an anticipatory stream of impulses tending in the same direction, will bring it about that these impulses will be evaluated more fully than others which may also be present; and the corresponding sensations will be lifted above others in intensity and distinctness.

6.27. This kind of anticipatory excitation of parts of the following of certain kinds of sensory impulses will mean that we shall not only be more ready to perceive the corresponding stimulus, but also that we shall perceive them from a certain angle or a certain ‘point of view’; we shall discriminate them more fully with respect to certain types of responses towards which the whole organism is disposed at the moment. The conception of ‘disposition’ or ‘set’ which we have discussed before in connexion with ‘purposiveness’ (4.60–4.63), is indeed the most general manifestation of the process of which attention is a special instance.6

6.28. It is worth noting in this connexion that something similar to attention can be observed also on a semiconscious or subconscious level. A person may be interested in finding some object or in noticing a particular event, and, although not thinking about it, will at once observe it when it presents itself to his senses, merely because his mind has been prepared for it. The same is probably true of certain suggestions in a hypnotic state which are carried out when the occasion arises. These states of preparedness for certain actions, like attention proper, or the set or disposition corresponding to a particular urge or drive, must probably be conceived as determined by a state of excitatory preparedness of the following of the classes of impulses corresponding to the objects to which they are directed.





