2. THE ORDER OF SENSORY QUALITIES IN ITS STATIC AND ITS DYNAMIC ASPECTS


2.20. It is necessary now to examine a little more carefully than we have yet done the character of the various ‘relations’ existing between the sensory qualities. It would seem at first as if the fact which we have pointed out (1.56–1.61), that these ‘relations’ possess themselves different qualitative attributes, would constitute an absolute obstacle to any attempt to reproduce an equivalent or isomorphous physical system built up from the known physiological processes, since in the latter case the different elements can be ordered solely by the one relation of cause and effect. We have provisionally met this difficulty by pointing out that differences in quality can also be reduced to differences in the effects, but it clearly needs yet more explicit consideration.

2.21. This problem is closely connected with what may be called the difference between the ‘static’ and the ‘dynamic’ aspect of the system of sensory qualities. We usually think of all the different sensory qualities as (at least potentially) existing at the same time, and it is this imagined simultaneous existence to which we refer when we speak of the ‘static’ aspect of the whole order. But as we have tried to show (1.38–1.55), all the questions which we can meaningfully ask about the differences between these qualities must necessarily refer to the different effects which in different combinations they will exercise on succeeding events: on how their appearance in a given situation affects our estimation of the other elements of the situation and so on. This is the system of qualities seen in its dynamic aspect. We shall later (2.44, 3.51, 5.42) see that the neural counterpart of the system of sensory qualities can similarly be regarded under the static aspect of an apparatus capable of performing the various discriminations, or dynamically by describing the various processes which it can perform.

2.22. Even when we imagine the system of sensory qualities as existing as a whole at a given moment, we do not mean that we ever have images of all the possible sensory qualities. What we mean when we think of that system as complete at any moment is that we could, as it were, run through it, proceeding from one quality to similar qualities, and by thus moving along all the possible dimensions, ultimately exhaust all possibilities. Even the ‘static’ system is thus in fact a sequence of images causally connected in complex ways.

2.23. The validity of the contention that all that can become a problem are the different effects which the different qualities produce, will depend on what in this connexion we include under ‘effects’. If, with the strict behaviourists, we were to confine the term ‘effects’ to externally observable behaviour (overt action or other peripheral responses) the contention could certainly not be defended. There is no justification, however, for that exclusive concentration on overt action which, under the influence of behaviourism, has been the fashion in psychology during the last thirty years. Physiological research during the same period has rather made it clearer than ever that we cannot hope to account for observed behaviour without reconstructing the ‘intervening processes in the brain.’9

2.24. It would indeed be absurd to recognize differences in the responses only in so far as they manifest themselves in overt behaviour and to disregard our subjective knowledge of discrimination: not only because such an attempt could not be carried through consistently (1.84–1.88), but also because we know that the central nervous system provides an apparatus for just the kind of processes which, although they elude direct observation, can be shown to be necessary to bring about the observable results.10 Any attempt to explain the distinction between sensory qualities in terms of peripheral responses was bound to fail, because there are no unique responses attached to particular stimuli. As we shall presently see, there is a process of multiple classification inserted between stimulus and response which makes it possible for the response to take account of the significance which the stimulus has in the context of other (external and internal) stimuli.

2.25. We shall have to show later (4.35–4.41) how this exclusive emphasis on peripheral responses is also misleading because, even in so far as peripheral responses contribute to the discrimination between stimuli, they can affect the further course of the mental processes only through the proprioceptive impulses (the ‘feedback’) by which they in turn are centrally recorded; even in these instances the decisive factors are therefore not the motor responses themselves, but the sensory impulses which they send back to the higher centres. We shall then see that it is also at least highly probable that, once a direct connexion has been established between the initial sensory impulse and the impulse recording the motor response evoked by it, the actual motor response becomes unnecessary for the continued functioning of this particular mechanism.

2.26. Once we include among the ‘effects’ of a stimulus all the intermediate links which may intervene between the stimulus causing a sensation and the overt response to it, the difficulty of defining sensory qualities in terms of their effects largely disappears. Whether we speak in terms of the physiological processes or in terms of the sensory qualities which they evoke, we shall find that the relevant differences between the individual events consist in the different immediate effects which they produce in different combinations. Each event or group of events will be distinguished from most others by the fact that it will evoke a particular set of other events. The ultimate overt response may thus be brought about via a long series of intermediate links which in the neural process cannot be directly observed but can only be reconstructed from what we know of the mental counterparts of these processes and of those marginal overt responses to which the latter lead.

2.27. The apparent paradox that certain relations between non-mental events should turn them into mental events resolves itself as soon as we accept the definition of mind as a peculiar order. Any individual neural event may have physical properties which are similar or different from other such events if investigated in isolation. But, irrespective of the properties which those events will possess by themselves, they will possess others solely as a result of their position in the order of inter-connected neural events. As an isolated event, tested for its effects on all sorts of other such events, it will show one set of properties and therefore have to be assigned a particular place in the order or classification of such single events; as an element of the complete neural structure it may show quite different properties.

2.28. That an order of events is something different from the properties of the individual events, and that the same order of events can be formed from elements of a very different individual character, can be illustrated from a great number of different fields. The same pattern of movements may be performed by a swarm of fireflies, a flock of birds, a number of toy balloons or perhaps a flight of aeroplanes; the same machine, a bicycle or a cotton gin, a lathe, a telephone exchange or an adding machine, can be constructed from a large variety of materials and yet remains the same kind of machine within which elements of different individual properties will perform the same functions. So long as the elements, whatever other properties they may possess, are capable of acting upon each other in the manner determining the structure of the machine, their other properties are irrelevant for our understanding of the machine.11

2.29. In the same sense the peculiar properties of the elementary neural events which are the terms of the mental order12 have nothing to do with that order itself. What we have called physical properties of those events are those properties which will appear if they are placed in a variety of experimental relations to different other kinds of events. The mental properties are those which they possess only as a part of the particular structure and which may be largely independent of the former. It is at least conceivable that the particular kind of order which we call mind might be built up from any one of several kind of different elements—electrical, chemical, or what not; all that is required is that by the simple relationship of being able to evoke each other in a certain order they correspond to the structure which we call mind.

2.30. That a particular order of events or objects is something different from all the individual events taken separately is the significant fact behind the endless and unprofitable talk about ‘the whole being greater than the mere sum of its parts’. Of course an order does not arise from the parts being thrown together in a heap, and one arrangement of a given set of parts may constitute something different from another arrangement of the same set of parts. An order involves elements plus certain relations between them, and the same order or structure may be formed by any elements capable of entering into the same relations to each other. The capacity of entering into such a relation is, of course, a property of the elements as much as any of those other properties which are irrelevant so far as the particular order is concerned. A particular order can exist as little without elements possessing that capacity, as the elements without the order in which they are related to each other would possess the particular significance which they have in that order. But it is only when we understand how the elements are related to each other that the talk about the whole being more than the parts becomes more than an empty phrase. All that theoretical biology has in this respect to say on the significance of structural properties as distinct from the properties of the elements, and about the significance of ‘organization’13, is directly applicable to our problem.

2.31. The question which thus arises for us is how it is possible to construct from the known elements of the neural system a structure which would be capable of performing such discrimination in its responses to stimuli as we know our mind in fact to perform.





