8. EMOTIONS AND THE JAMES-LANGE THEORY


4.64. The second kind of dispositions, emotions, are dispositions for a type of actions which in the first instance are not made necessary by a primary change in the state of the organism, but which are complexes of responses appropriate to a variety of environmental conditions. Fear and anger, sorrow and joy, are attitudes towards the environment, and particularly towards fellow members of the same species, which may become attached to, and then regularly evoked by, a great many different classes of stimuli.

4.65. This means that a great variety of external events, and also some conditions of the organism itself, may evoke one of several patterns of attitudes or dispositions which, while they last, will affect or ‘colour’ the perception of, and the responses to, any external event. In the mental order of events, that is in the influence which external stimuli can exercise on further mental processes and on behaviour, these states will occupy positions which in many ways will be similar to those of the sensory qualities: the occurrence of any one of them will be capable of modifying the result of a given sensory situation in the same kind of way in which the appearance of a new sensory experience could do so.

4.66. Emotions may thus be described as ‘affective qualities’ similar to the sensory qualities and forming part of the same comprehensive order of mental qualities. But they differ, of course, in some respects from the sensory qualities and must be regarded as forming a distinct sub-system of the more comprehensive mental order. The relation between the order of affective qualities and the order of sensory qualities must be conceived as somewhat similar to the relations between the orders of the different sensory modalities which also form sub-systems of the more comprehensive order of all sensory qualities (3.75).

4.67. The most conspicuous difference between the order of the sensory qualities and the order of the affective qualities is that, while the former is organized with spatial relationships as one of its main ordering principles, the affective qualities do not refer to particular points in space. They represent not qualities of particular things but rather a condition of an interval of time as a whole. They will refer not to what is to be expected of an external position but are rather a temporary bias or preference for certain types of responses towards any external situation.

4.68. These important differences between sensory and affective qualities, however, do not alter the fact that the general principle by which they are determined is the same. The similarity of the response to different stimuli will in both instances be determined by the fact that the corresponding different nervous impulses will evoke the same following of other impulses. Similar emotions, as similar sensations, are nervous impulses which evoke the same following and which are therefore functionally equivalent and classified as the same kind of event. The main difference is that within the sensory sub-system of the mental order the classifying connexions will be mainly with other impulses representing sensory stimuli, while in the affective sub-system the classifying connexions will be mainly with impulses representing certain types of behaviour.

4.69. But although the order of affective qualities will constitute a sub-system in the more comprehensive system of qualities (in the sense that the impulses belonging to it will be less closely connected with impulses in other parts of the larger system than they are connected among themselves), this does not prevent this subsystem from contributing to the differences between sensory qualities, and vice versa. By becoming connected with sensory qualities those differently organized qualities can add, as it were, an additional dimension to the order of sensory qualities; and similarly the differences between the different sensory qualities associated to different groups of the latter may assist in enriching the variety of differentiations between the former.

4.70. This account of the determination of the affective qualities of course corresponds very closely to the familiar James-Lange theory of emotions As we said before of the Berkeleyan theory of spatial vision (3.40–3.42), the James-Lange theory also may be regarded as a special case of the theory of mental qualities here outlined. The modifications which are required to make the James-Lange theory fit into our scheme are practically the same as those which we had to make with regard to the rôle which proprioceptive impulses play in determining the perception of space. We shall not regard the actual sensations produced by the various bodily accompaniments of a given stimulus as determining its affective values, but merely the following of physiological impulses which record the states of the body and which, in the same manner in which such a following can determine the peculiar functional significance which we know as sensory qualities, can also determine affective qualities.

4.71. We do, therefore, not propose to say, with William James, that emotions are ‘a set of kinesthetic and organic sensations’. We shall merely contend that the connexions with impulses recording certain connected sets of changes in the general state of the body can give certain central impulses that peculiar position in the whole system of mental events which we know as the different affective qualities.

4.72. The James-Lange theory of emotions (like Berkeley’s theory of spatial vision) would thus appear to be justified in its endeavour to reduce the qualitative attributes of those mental events to relations between different impulses which, if fully evaluated, might evoke certain other sensations. Both theories, however, fall short of a real answer to their problem, and in fact merely shift the problem to a different point, because they attempt to explain the quality of one kind of experience by reference to qualities occurring in another kind of experience, which latter they take as not requiring explanation. In so far as they were concerned with only that one kind of mental quality this procedure was inevitable. But if we consistently follow up and generalize the principle underlying those theories, there remain of course no given mental qualities; we are forced to replace the whole system of qualities by a system of relations between initially undifferentiated elements which can be conceived to be isomorphic with the system of qualities which we have to explain.





