2. THE GRADUAL FORMATION OF A ‘MAP’ REPRODUCING RELATIONS BETWEEN CLASSES OF EVENTS IN THE ENVIRONMENT


5.17. The connexions formed by the linkages between different impulses will evidently reproduce certain regularities in the occurrence of the external stimuli acting on the organism. The network of these connexions will reproduce not any attributes of the individual stimuli (whose identity is determined solely by their capacity of setting up impulses in a particular sensory fibre, or group of fibres), but a sort of record of past associations of any particular stimulus with other stimuli which have acted upon the organism at the same time. While such a record, dependent upon the frequency which in the course of the development of an individual (or possibly species) certain stimuli have occurred together, will reproduce certain relationships between these stimuli determined by the physical differences between them, it will clearly not give a full or correct reproduction of all the relations which can be said ‘objectively’ to exist between these stimuli.

5.18. We have seen in the first Chapter (1.14–1.19) that a description of the stimuli in physical terms involves a classification of these stimuli based solely on their observed relations towards each other and neglecting any difference or similarity of the response of the organism on which they act. It seems to be in conformity with general scientific procedure to treat only those differences between stimuli which manifest themselves in their relations to other stimuli as differences belonging to the physical world (or as differences constituting the physical order of the universe), and to regard differences and similarities between groups of stimuli which show themselves solely in their effects on certain types of organisms as due to the organization of these organisms. Our present task is to show the kind of classification, or of ordering of the stimuli, which, through the process we have sketched, such an organism is likely to develop.

5.19. The gradual evolution of the mental order involves thus a gradual approximation to the order which in the external world exists between the stimuli evoking the impulses which ‘represent’ them in the central nervous system. But while conceptual thinking has long been recognized as a process of continuous reorganization of the (supposedly constant) elements of the phenomenal world, a reorganization which makes their arrangement correspond more perfectly with experience, we have been led to the conclusion that the qualitative elements of which the phenomenal world is built up, and the whole order of the sensory qualities, are themselves subject to continuous change. There remains, in consequence, no justification for the sharp distinction between the direct sensory perception of qualities and the more abstract processes of thought;3 we shall have to assume that the operations of both the senses and the intellect are equally based on acts of classification (or reclassification) performed by the central nervous system, and that they are both part of the same continuous process by which the microcosm in the brain progressively approximates to a reproduction of the macrocosm of the external world.

5.20. The order which the linkages will gradually create in the central nervous system will, for several reasons, constitute not only a very imperfect but in some respect even a definitely erroneous reproduction of the relations which exist between the corresponding physical stimuli. In the first instance, the receptor organs through which the physical stimuli set up nervous impulses are imperfectly selective in several respects: the organism possesses receptor organs which are sensitive for only certain kinds of external events but not for others; and these receptor organs which it does possess also do not sharply distinguish between stimuli which are physically different. Physically different events may stimulate the same receptor organs and set up impulses in the same sensory fibre, and physical stimuli of the same kind but acting on different receptors may be recorded as different sensory modalities (1.39). Which external events are recorded at all, and how they will be recorded, will thus depend on the given structure of the organism as it has been shaped by the process of evolution.

5.21. Secondly, the kinds of physical stimuli which will act on a particular organism, and the relative frequency of the simultaneous occurrence of the different stimuli, will correspond not to conditions in the world at large, but to conditions in the particular environment in which the organism has existed. The partial reproduction of the relations between the stimuli acting on the organism will therefore be a reproduction of those relations only which appear in a certain sector of the external world, and will not necessarily be representative of those existing in the whole of it.

5.22. Thirdly, as we have seen already (Chapter IV), one of the most important parts of the ‘environment’ from which the central nervous system will receive signals producing linkages, will be the milieu intérieur, the internal environment or the rest of the organism in which the central nervous system exists. Since the events in the organism will in some degree be co-ordinated with each other and with the events in the external world proper, independently of the functioning of the higher nervous centres, it is inevitable that the relations existing between them should play a large part in shaping the order that will be formed in the higher centres.

5.23. Fourthly, there is no reason to assume that the capacity of the higher centres to form connexions between the neurons in which impulses occur at the same time is uniform throughout those centres. It is probable that the given anatomical structure will facilitate the formation of certain connexions and make the formation of others more difficult (or impossible). The resulting structure of connexions would by this be further distorted or prevented from giving a true reproduction of the relations between even those impulses which unequivocally represent specific physical stimuli.

5.24. Fifthly, as a result of the successive classification of the impulses on several different levels (4.33), the signals reaching the higher and more comprehensive centres will often not represent individual stimuli, but may stand for classes or groups of such stimuli formed at lower levels for particular functional purposes. Any further classification effected at the higher centres will therefore be subject to all the distortions which, for reasons similar to those already mentioned, have occurred on lower levels.

5.25. In discussing the relationships between the network of connexions which will thus be formed, and the structure of external events which it can be said to reproduce, it will be useful sometimes to employ the simile of the map which in a somewhat analogous manner reproduces some of the relations which exist in certain parts of the physical world. The picture of the geographical map in this connexion comes so readily to one’s mind4 because of its similarity with the simple arrow diagram which is the most obvious method of schematically depicting the structure of a complex dynamic system whose elements are connected as cause and effect.

5.26. This ‘map’ of the relationships between various kinds of events in the external world, which the linkages will gradually produce in the higher nervous centres, will not only be a very imperfect map, but also a map which is subject to continuous although very gradual change. It will not only give merely some of the relations existing in the external world, and give in addition some which are different from those which exist objectively, but it will also not give a constant but a variable picture of the structures which it reproduces.

5.27. The different maps which will thus be formed in different brains will be determined by factors which are sufficiently similar to make those maps also similar to each other. But they will not be identical. Complete identity of the maps would presuppose not only an identical history of the different individuals but also complete identity of their anatomical structure. The mere fact that for each individual the map will be subject to constant changes practically precludes the possibility that at any moment the maps of two individuals should be completely identical.

5.28. The conception of ‘similarity’ between several different systems of relationships which are not completely identical, such as would exist between two maps of this kind, and still more so the conception of varying degrees of similarity, and that of similar positions in similar systems of relationships, present considerable conceptual difficulties. It is the same difficulty which we encounter when we consider the degrees of similarities between various qualities or gestalts. The simile of the map, however, will show what is meant: we can recognize without great difficulty not only the similarity of different maps of the same region, although they may be drawn in different projections, contain different details and refer to different dates, but we shall in general also be able to identify corresponding points on two such maps as referring to the same point in the real world. Two persons discussing the same walk, with different maps of the region before them, will in general encounter no difficulty in understanding each other, although particular points on their route may have different significance for them.

5.29. In the ‘map’ with which we are concerned, the relevant relations between the individual points are not their spatial relations, however, but solely the paths through which impulses can be transmitted. It is a topological and not a topographical map. It will resemble rather one of those schematic railway maps in which connexions are indicated by straight lines without representing accurate distances. It will resemble a topographical map only in the sense that it will also show where any given movement will lead us.

5.30. For a description of the process by which linkages will gradually produce a map of the relations between the stimuli acting on the organism, the simile of the map, however, soon becomes inadequate, because the classification with which we are concerned will, as we have seen, occur on many successive levels. We should have to think of the whole system of connexions as consisting of many vertically superimposed sub-systems which in some respects may operate independently of each other. Every sub-system of this kind will constitute a partial map of the environment, and the maps formed at the lower levels will serve for the guidance of merely a limited range of responses, and at the same time act as filters or preselectors for the impulses sent on to the higher centres, for which, in turn, the maps of the lower levels constitute a part of the environment.

5.31. While the full and detailed classification of sensory impulses, corresponding to the order of sensory qualities which we know from conscious experience, is effected mainly at the highest centres, we must assume a more limited classification on somewhat similar principles to take place already at the lower levels, where certainly no conscious experience is associated with it. The qualitative order which is familiar to us in its most developed form from our conscious experience will exist in a more rudimentary form on lower levels where we have no direct knowledge of it, but can only attempt to reconstruct it as part of our endeavour to understand the whole hierarchy of the apparatus of classification which culminates in conscious mind. There can be little doubt that we must assume the existence on lower levels of such an order of the sensory impulses somewhat analogous to that revealed by our conscious experience, an order which we can ascertain only from the character of the discriminatory responses of which we are not conscious.

5.32. We have already discussed the significance of this hierarchical order of the central nervous system and the significance which the classification of impulses will have for the operation of the whole (4.11–4.26), and we shall leave aside until the next chapter the question of the ‘conscious’ character of some of the processes which take place at the highest levels. It will also be seen now, although a fuller discussion of this must wait until later in this chapter, that the difference between what are commonly regarded as merely ‘mechanical’ and as mental processes respectively is not one of kind but merely one of degree; and that the extent to which a process partakes of the character of the mental will depend on the complexity of the ordering processes which intervene between the stimulus and the response; or rather, since the stimulus-response terminology becomes somewhat inappropriate at this stage, between the excitatory state of the sensory apparatus and the resulting behaviour.





