6. THE ORDER OF SENSORY QUALITIES NOT CONFINED TO CONSCIOUS EXPERIENCE


1.68. We have so far assumed that the reader is familiar with the system of sensory qualities from his own conscious experience of these qualities. This, however, is not to be understood to mean that this particular classification of events appears only in our subjective experience. Of course we know this system of qualities from this source. But just as experience tells us that in their relations to each other things do not always resemble each other or differ from each other in the same manner as they seem to be alike or different to us, so we also learn that what appears alike or different to us usually also appears alike or different to other men. Beyond this, it seems clear that not only other men in their conscious action, but both we and others in unconscious action, and also animals, treat as alike or different not what is so in the physical sense, but more or less what in our own conscious experience appears to us to be so. In other words, the order of sensory qualities, once it is known, can be recognized as present in actions which are not directed by consciousness or by a human mind.

1.69. It would, of course, not be possible to discuss the phenomenal world with other people if they did not perceive this world in terms of the same, or at least of a very similar, order of qualities as we do. This means that the conscious mind of other people classifies stimuli in a manner similar to that in which our own mind does so, and that the different sensory qualities are for them related to each other in a manner which is similar to that which we know. In other words, although the system of sensory qualities is ‘subjective’ in the sense of belonging to the perceiving subject as distinguished from ‘objective’ (belonging to the perceived objects)—a distinction which is the same as that between the phenomenal and the physical order—it is yet inter-personal and not (or at least not entirely) peculiar to the individual.

1.70. Nor is the classification of stimuli in terms of sensory qualities confined to conscious experience. We know that both we and other people classify stimuli in our unconscious responses (or in responses to stimuli of which we do not become conscious) according to roughly the same principles as we do in our conscious action.38 The order of sensory qualities exists therefore also outside the realm of consciousness. If, as we shall suggest, we identify with the realm of mental phenomena the range of events within which a classification in terms of sensory (and similar mental) qualities occurs, this realm extends far beyond the sphere of conscious events which merely constitute a special group within the more comprehensive class of mental events.

1.71. It is possible, finally, to ascertain by various experimental methods that not only other men but also most higher animals classify stimuli according to an order which is similar to that of our own sensory experiences. It has even been shown that some animals, e.g., chicks in the famous Révész experiment,39 are subject to the same optical illusions as men. We must therefore conclude that the general principles according to which the neural system of the higher animals classifies stimuli are, at least in their general outline, similar to those on which our own mind operates.

1.72. While it has been inevitable that in introducing our problem we started from the conscious experience of sensory qualities, this proves now to be only one particular aspect of a wider problem. In the further discussion we shall treat conscious experience as merely a special instance of a more general phenomenon, and speak of mental phenomena whenever we deal with any events which are ordered on principles analogous to those revealed by conscious experience. All further consideration of the peculiar additional attributes which a mental event in this sense must possess in order to be described as ‘conscious’ will be postponed to a later stage (Chapter VI).

1.73. It has undoubtedly been unfortunate for the development of psychology that the distinguishing attribute of its object was so long considered to be the ‘conscious’ character of experience, and that no definition of mental events was available which was independent of this conscious character.40 The sphere of mental events evidently transcends the sphere of conscious events and there is no justification for the attitude frequently met that either identifies the two or even maintains that to speak of unconscious mental events is a contradiction in terms.41

1.74. But although we can agree with the Behaviourists in deploring the exclusive concentration of the older psychology on conscious events, they themselves, in their endeavour to get rid of consciousness have gone to the opposite extreme and with the problem of consciousness have tried to eliminate the problem of the existence of the qualitative order which is peculiar to mental phenomena. This problem, as we shall see, cannot be disregarded even if we want merely to account for observed behaviour.





