6. PATTERNS OF MOTOR RESPONSES


4.48. The manner in which the separate motor impulses are co-ordinated so as to produce complex patterns of behaviour consisting of many simultaneous and successive movements can be considered here only very briefly. We must probably assume that these patterns can be elicited as wholes by a few signals sent out from the higher centres, and that we have thus on the motor side to deal with a phenomenon of ‘bundling’ which in some respects is the converse of the process of classification on the sensory side. As in the latter case, different complexes of sensory impulses will be represented at the higher centres by a few ‘representative’ impulses, so that a few central impulses may suffice to evoke bundles of motor impulses producing complex patterns of behaviour. The particular manner in which this behaviour is executed may then be determined by the interplay of motor and sensory impulses at lower levels.

4.49. These behaviour patterns, however, must not be conceived as fixed but as highly variable. Just as at the higher centres it will not be only one particular sensory impulse, but any one of a class of many different combinations of impulses, which will give rise to a particular response, so the motor signal sent out from the higher centres will be for the execution not of one particular pattern of co-ordinated movements but for any one of a class of such patterns. Such a class of patterns will consist of those different combinations of movements which under different conditions will produce a particular result. Which of these patterns will be put into effect will be decided in the light of the whole sensory position.

4.50. At the higher centres the connexions will thus increasingly exist, not between particular stimuli and particular responses, but between classes of stimuli and classes of responses, and between classes of classes of stimuli and classes of classes of responses, etc. The order given by the highest centre in response to a particular situation may thus be of the kind which we have called a general ‘directive’ for an action of a certain class, and it may be only at lower levels that the appropriate response is selected from the class of behaviour patterns which in different situations may produce the desired result.

4.51. The extent to which behaviour patterns can be adjusted to the sensory situation probably varies with the level which is in control. There is reason to believe that some highly stereotyped or ‘mechanical’ patterns, such as those of the movements of flying and running, are co-ordinated on a fairly low level and that even at these low levels the execution is constantly controlled and modified by sensory signals from the kinesthetic receptors and the semicircular canals. At higher levels the pattern of movement will be variable to a higher degree.

4.52. We can again not concern ourselves here with the question to what extent behaviour patterns are innate to the individual and how the innate and the learned behaviour pattern interact.8 There can be little doubt that even fairly complex behaviour patterns, or rather classes of behaviour patterns from which a selection will be made in the light of the whole sensory situation, are innate and can be elicited by fairly simple stimuli. A well-known instance is the evocation of the maternal behaviour in the rat by definite chemical stimuli.9

4.53. The selection of the particular behaviour pattern from the class of such patterns appropriate to the result aimed at, must not be conceived as taking place in one act. The choice of a kind of behaviour pattern and its continued control, modification, and adjustment while it takes place, will be a process in which the various factors act successively to produce the final outcome. It is not as if the whole behaviour pattern were determined upon before any movement takes place, but rather that during the process of execution further adjustments are constantly made to secure the result.

4.54. In connexion with these continuous adjustments, made while the movement proceeds, the interaction between the exteroceptive and the proprioceptive impulses and the operation of the ‘feed-back’ principle10 become of special significance. In the first instance, the sensory representation of the environment, and of the possible goal to be achieved in that environment, will evoke a movement pattern generally aimed at the achievement of the goal. But at first the pattern of movement initiated will not be fully successful. The current sensory reports about what is happening will be checked against expectations, and the difference between the two will act as a further stimulus indicating the required corrections. The result of every step in the course of the actions will, as it were, be evaluated against the expected results, and any difference will serve as an indicator of the corrections required.

4.55. In this process the intervention of the highest centres is probably needed only to give the general directions, while the execution and current adjustment is left to the guidance of the lower centres. Once the ‘course is set’, the deviations will be automatically corrected by the differences between the expected and the effective stimuli acting as the signs which produce the correction. Such responses to a difference between expectations and outcome are merely a special case, on the one hand, of the general principle that a response to any new stimulus is determined by the pre-existing sensory state, and, on the other, of the capacity of the nervous system to respond in a particular manner to certain kinds of relations between impulses rather than merely to particular impulses. Both these characteristics of the higher centres, the predominant importance of the pre-existing excitatory state, and the tendency to respond to differences between expected and realized impulses, will have to be considered further in the next chapter.





