3. THE COMMON SPACE-TIME FRAMEWORK


6.16. The ‘unity of consciousness’ means, above all, that conscious events occupy a definite position in the same spatial and temporal order, that they are ‘dated’ and ‘placed’ in relation to other conscious events, and that all sensory and affective events which ‘enter consciousness’, together with the reproductions or images of such experiences, belong to the same order or universe. This means that within the range of conscious events the ‘generality’ (as distinguished from the ‘specificity’, see 5.34 and 5.49) of their classification or evaluation has reached the highest degree: they are discriminated not only with respect to particular responses but with respect to all responses guided by conscious processes. This comprehensiveness of the system of relationships which connect and order all conscious events with respect to each other is probably the most characteristic attribute of these events.

6.17. This highest degree of comprehensiveness of the order of the system of relations prevailing on the conscious level does not necessarily mean that all the stimuli recorded by impulses proceeding at a lower level must also be capable of obtaining a distinct position at that higher level (4.53) or even that the number of different impulses which may be connected at that highest level must necessarily be larger than that of those which can possess connexions at some lower level. The comprehensiveness of which we speak is rather that of the top level of a hierarchic order at which all the elements belonging to that level are interconnected, while many elements belonging to lower levels may be connected with many other elements of the same level only via that higher level. It may be because all classes of impulses at this highest level form a common order, rather than because symbolic representations of all individual stimuli can reach this highest level, that it possesses this specially comprehensive character which distinguishes the system of relations on this level.

6.18. The existence of a common spatio-temporal framework, in which all the events which occur at that level are given a definite place, means that all reproductions or images of past or possible events will there be related to the experiences which are ‘here’ and ‘now’, and that this universal relatedness of all events to this common point of reference constitutes them into a continuum, the ‘I’. The ever-presence of this common framework so long as consciousness is awake presupposes the continuous existence of certain representations of a most abstract kind: of a skeleton outline of the (spatial and temporal) surroundings within which we place the picture of the particular objects of which we are consciously aware or which we consciously imagine.

6.19. The continuous presence, while consciousness lasts, of these mental contents of a most abstract character, representing the spatial and temporal structure of the environment, is not always recognized. This is probably due to the preconception that concrete perceptions always precede the more abstract mental contents. There can be little doubt, however, that the distinct conscious picture of particular phenomena is always embedded in, or surrounded by, a semiconscious and more shadowy outline of the rest of the surroundings, which is co-present with, although much less distinct and detailed than, the conscious picture itself.

6.20. Of this co-presence of subconscious representations of the environment with the conscious representations of those parts of which we are clearly aware, we can easily convince ourselves if we remember the common experience of suddenly feeling to ‘have the ground withdrawn under our feet’ if something presupposed by the conscious picture proves to be missing. If, e.g., after our conscious sensations were interpreted on the assumption that we were in an enclosed room, we discover that the walls behind us are missing, or when, walking on what seemed to be level ground, we suddenly come to a precipice, this alters our view even of those things of which we were fully aware before. In all such instances the subconsciously presupposed background of our experience is discovered to be missing, and the firm ‘placing’ of the consciously experienced events in a subconsciously presupposed framework is upset. The result is usually a characteristic feeling of dizziness and of disturbed orientation.

6.21. Conscious experience thus rests on a much more extensive basis of less fully conscious or subconscious images of the rest of the surroundings, which nevertheless (like the following of a sensory impulse which determines its quality) give to the conscious representations their place and value. Conscious experiences have in this respect justly been compared to mountain tops rising above the clouds which, while alone visible, yet presuppose an invisible substructure determining their position relative to each other.





