3. THE ‘MAP’ AND THE ‘MODEL’


5.33. We must now consider the manner in which, within a given structure of connexions, the many impulses proceeding at any one moment, can mutually influence each other. Up to this point we have examined only the mutual effects which new afferent impulses arriving more or less at the same time will exercise upon each other. The centres at which such impulses arrive will, however, never be found in an inactive state. As we ascend to higher and higher levels, the function of new impulses arriving there will be less and less to evoke specific responses but increasingly merely to modify and control behaviour in the light of the whole situation, represented not only by simultaneously arriving other impulses but also by the retained picture of the environment. This involves that a sort of record of recently received stimuli is kept at these higher centres.

5.34. As any afferent impulse is passed on to higher levels, it will send out more and more branches which will potentially be capable of reinforcing or inhibiting an ever-increasing range of other impulses. This increasing ramification of every chain of impulses, as it ascends through successive relays to higher levels, will mean that at any moment the general excitatory state of the whole nervous system will depend less and less on the new stimuli currently received, and more and more on the continued course of chains of impulses set up by stimuli which were received during some period of the past. In consequence, an ever-increasing part of the forces determining the response will consist of the pre-existing distribution of impulses throughout the whole system of connected fibres, while the newly arriving impulses will play a correspondingly smaller part.

5.35. It is a corollary of this steadily increasing influence of the pre-existing excitatory state that the main significance of any new stimulus will be that it will alter the general disposition for responding in particular ways to further stimuli, and that less and less of its effect will consist in producing a specific response. In other words, a greater and greater part of the effects of impulses set up by any new stimuli will go to create a ‘set’ controlling future responses, and a smaller part directly to influence current responses. As we reach higher levels, the classification of the impulses becomes thus less specific to a particular function, and more general in the sense that it will help to create a disposition to a certain range of responses to an ever-growing variety of stimuli.

5.36. As the classification becomes thus more ‘general’ and less ‘specific’, the classifying event also becomes more and more definitely a central process while the relations to any particular peripheral response become at the same time more remote and round-about. As higher and more embracing centres are reached the effect of any newly arriving afferent impulse on the central process will become more and more important compared with its direct effect on peripheral responses. We must think increasingly in terms of a continuous central process which at any moment will merely be somewhat modified by the newly arriving afferent impulses and only part of which will, as it were, continuously spill over into efferent signals producing peripheral responses.

5.37. It thus will be the totality of all the different impulses proceeding at any given moment in the higher centres which determines what is to be the response to any newly arriving impulse. Since all these impulses thus act as a sort of representation or picture of the momentary environment, to which the response to any new impulse is adjusted, it is not fanciful to describe the whole as an apparatus of orientation.5 By providing a reproduction of the environment in which the organism moves at the moment, it adjusts the responses to those elements in the environment which are represented in it.

5.38. It seems probable that at these higher centres some of the impulses representing external stimuli continue for a time to circulate in some manner through the same fibres after the stimulus has ceased to operate, and to indicate the presence of an external object although it no longer acts as a stimulus. This may be brought about by the impulses which represent the total sensory situation of a moment becoming associated with each other and mutually evoking each other, until this representation of a given object is wiped out by some new stimulus indicating that a different object now occupies the same point in the spatial order. (See 3.15 and 3.34 above.)6

5.39. It is indeed a difficult problem why and in what circumstances a given set of representative impulses will ever lead to the expectation of a more or less constant environment, or produce the persistence of a given picture of the particular environment in which the organism exists. The explanation probably is that, as suggested, certain constellations of impulses mutually support each other, or that by a sort of circular process they will tend to re-evoke themselves rather than a different constellation corresponding to a different environment. The interaction of the chains of associations attached to the different impulses and groups of impulses will effect some kind of selection from the infinite range of possibilities which the several elements of the complex picture would tend to evoke.

5.40. Whether this actually is the case or not, we must certainly distinguish between two different kinds of physiological ‘memory’ or traces left behind by the action of any stimulus: one is the semi-permanent change in the structure of connexions or paths which we have already discussed and which determines the courses through which any chain of impulses can run; the other is the pattern of active impulses proceeding at any moment as a result of the stimuli received in the recent past, and perhaps also merely as part of a continuous flow of impulses of central origin which never altogether ceases even if no external stimuli are received.

5.41. The pattern of impulses which is traced at any moment within the given network of semi-permanent channels may be regarded as a kind of model of the particular environment in which the organism finds itself at the moment and which will enable it to take account of that environment in all its movements. This ‘model’, which is formed at any moment by the active impulses, must not be confused with what we have called the ‘map’, the semi-permanent connexions representing not the environment of the moment but the kind of events which the organism has met during its whole past. This distinction between what for lack of better terms we shall continue to describe as the ‘map’ and the ‘model’ respectively, both of which are reproductions of relations between events in the outside world, is so important that it requires some further elucidation.

5.42. The semi-permanent map, which is formed by connexions capable of transmitting impulses from neuron to neuron, is merely an apparatus for classification or orientation, capable of being called into operation by any new impulse, but existing independently of the particular impulses proceeding in it at a given moment.7 It represents the kind of world in which the organism has existed in the past, or the different kinds of stimuli which have acquired significance for it, but it provides by itself no information about the particular environment in which the organism is placed at the moment. It is the apparatus of classification in what we have called its static aspect (2.21) and would continue to exist (if this were possible) if at any moment the central nervous system were completely at rest.

5.43. This semi-permanent structure provides the framework within which (or the categories in terms of which) the impulses proceeding at any time are evaluated. It determines what further impulses any given constellation of impulses will set up, and represents the kinds of classes or ‘qualities’ which the system can record, but not what particular events will be recorded at any moment. This structure itself in turn is liable to change as a result of the impulses proceeding in it, but relatively to the constantly changing pattern of impulses it can be regarded as semi-permanent.

5.44. Within this structural framework of paths the flow of impulses will at any moment trace a further pattern which will have significance only by its position in that structural framework within which it moves. This ‘model’ formed by the moving impulses or by a particular operation of the apparatus of classification manifests the latter in its dynamic aspect. Its nature is, of course, limited by the possibilities which the structural ‘map’ provides, by the connexions or channels which exist; but within these limits its character will be determined by the combined effects of the active impulses.

5.45. The response to any newly arriving sensory impulses will thus depend not only on the semi-permanent map formed by the network of connexions; it will also depend on the pattern of the impulses already proceeding at that movement within the pattern of channels; and it will be the position of the former within the latter pattern which will determine the significance of the new impulses. The complete apparatus of orientation thus consists of a structure of which a certain part will be activated, or of a sort of model within a model which has significance only by its position within that model, and which adjusts the responses to any new stimulus not only to the general significance which stimuli of that sort will possess in any circumstances, but to the particular significance which they will possess in the situation existing at the moment.

5.46. This relationship between our ‘model’ and our ‘map’ is the same as that which, in a game of war (Krieg spiel) played with symbolic figures on a map, exists between the patterns traced on the map by the figures and the map itself. Or we may think of a game of Nine Men’s Morris where similarly the relative position of the men to each other is significant only with respect to the pattern on the board on which the game is played. To make the comparison closer we would have to imagine that the ‘men’ in either instance are individually undistinguishable from one another apart from their position on the map or the board, and that at any moment, in addition to the men present as the result of the preceding moves, new men may appear at certain points and, finally, that in moving the men leave traces which gradually alter the pattern on the map or the board. The important point, with respect to which these illustrations correspond with our case, is that the pattern traced by the movement of the men is significant not by its shape in space but solely by its relation to the other pattern within which those movements take place (cf. 2.5).

5.47. A closer parallel to our case would in some respects be provided by a system of pipes or tubes through which move columns of a pliable substance. If we assume that at many points of interconnexion these tubes are joined by ‘afferent’ tubes which can bring in from the outside new columns of the substance, and by ‘efferent’ tubes which may drain such columns from the system, that at any junction the columns may divide, and that the direction of the pressure of the columns meeting at such junctions8 will decide in which further direction they will jointly move on, we get an approximate representation of the situation with which we have to deal. We might even complete the picture by assuming that, e.g., because the system of tubes is bored into some yielding material, pressure from adjoining tubes may lead to some new channels being formed through which the moving substance first seeps and then moves freely. It will then be the pattern which the moving columns trace within (and relative to) the pattern formed by the system of tubes, which will correspond to the pattern traced by the nervous impulses within (and relative to) the structure of connected fibres.

5.48. The relation which exists between our ‘model’ and the ‘map’ may also be compared in some respects to the relation existing between some complex geometrical structure and the system of co-ordinates with reference to which it can be defined. The essential characteristics of the structure will be described in terms of an equation which can be interpreted with reference to many possible systems of co-ordinates, and the actual structure will appear different according as we represent it within different (say Cartesian or polar) co-ordinates. What is significant about the structure of our ‘model’ is not the actual relations in space between the impulses, but solely their relations to the structure of connexions, relations which correspond to those expressed by the equation by which a given structure is defined in analytical geometry.

5.49. Once such a continuous reproduction of the environment is maintained in the highest centres, it becomes the main function of the sensory impulses to keep this apparatus of orientation up to date and capable of determining the responses to particular stimuli in the light of the whole situation. The classification of these impulses is then no longer specific to particular functions, but has become general in the sense that any one of them may, by its position in the comprehensive pattern, exercise some influence on practically any response. The classified impulses proceeding at any moment operate as symbols representing the significance of the stimuli which have evoked them, for any behaviour which a newly arriving stimulus will tend to evoke, or which would be determined by the joint effect of the multiplicity of processes set in train by stimuli recorded earlier.





