6. THE MODEL-OBJECT RELATIONSHIP


5.77. It will be useful further to elucidate the character of the relationship between the ‘model’ and its object, and to illustrate the possibilities of ‘reproducing’ certain features of a complex structure within certain parts of the same structure, by constructing an imaginary and greatly simplified model of the model-object relationship itself. To be quite satisfactory for our purposes this super-model should be conceived in strictly physical terms, that is, it should be built up from elements whose properties are all defined in terms of explicit relations to the other elements of the system, and which possessed no phenomenal or sensory properties whatever. But as such a purely abstract model would give little help to the imagination, it will be necessary to resort in some measure to visual imagery.

5.78. While using the conception of a model for this purpose, we must, of course, avoid the suggestion, originally connected with the word model, that it must be the creation of a thinking mind. Since the purpose of introducing the conception is to show how the human mind itself may in a certain sense be conceived as a model of the macrocosm within which it exists, there must be no such three terms as object, model, and the modeller. Our task is rather to show in what sense it is possible that within parts of the macrocosm a microcosm may be formed which reproduces certain aspects of the macrocosm and through this will enable the substructure of which it forms part to behave in a manner which will assist its continued existence.

5.79. We shall conceive for this purpose of a self-contained system or universe consisting of a cloud of particles which individually differ from each other solely by the different effect which in different combinations or constellations they will exercise upon each other. With regard to this universe we shall assume that we possess the capacity of the Laplacean ‘demon’ of knowing of every particle all its relations to other particles, and therefore of being able to identify each individual particle by the different effects it will have in all conceivable circumstances. Particles of the same kind would mean particles which in all conceivable circumstances could be substituted for one another without thereby altering the course of events.

5.80. Strictly speaking we ought, of course, not even conceive of what we have described as a ‘cloud’ of particles as being arranged in perceptual space, but should describe the relations of these particles to each other in terms of their acting upon each other in particular ways. But since we must resort to representation in perceptual terms, we cannot dispense with the familiar spatial order, and for the purposes of visualizing the order of our universe it will even be useful to imagine that the individual particles possess perceptible identifying marks, such as different colours, indicating the class to which they belong.

5.81. Among the different properties which the different kinds of particles will possess, one of the most important will be their different capacities of combining with other particles of the same or of different kinds into more or less stable structures, which, as structures, will show their own peculiar relations to other particles or structures of particles. By stability of such structures we mean the probability of their persistence in the face of the action upon them by the environment. All the possible structures which groups of particles may form within our universe will in this sense require for their persistence certain environmental conditions, which in the case of some kinds of such structures may almost always be satisfied, while for others they may be of rare occurrence. On the whole, the more complex the structure, the greater will be the number of external influences capable of destroying it, and the more special the circumstances required for its continued existence.

5.82. Some such structures may persist, not because their coherence resists most external circumstances, but because they will move away from such agents before they are destroyed. In the familiar world a drop of mercury is likely to preserve its cohesion because it is apt to ‘get out of the way’ of any mass which might squash it, and a leaf avoids being torn to shreds by a high wind by taking up a position of least resistance. There is, of course, nothing ‘teleological’ in these movements which assist the persistence of such structures; but the cause which would destroy them if it acted in its full force or for any length of time at the same time removes them from its influence.

5.83. In general, if the conditions required for the persistence of any more complex structure are not likely always to prevail at the place where it happens to be, it will continue to exist only if (and we shall encounter such substructures, except as temporary phenomena, only in so far as) they can respond appropriately to certain events, and even in some measure anticipate their occurrence, i.e. perform the appropriate response as soon as certain other events occur which indicate the imminence of the harmful one. It is conceivable, though not very likely, that such structures may persist because they just happen thus to respond to all or most of the events which usually precede those which would destroy them.

5.84. The chance of persistence of any given structure will evidently be increased if it not only happens to respond appropriately to harmful or beneficial influences and to some symptoms of such factors, but if it also possesses the capacity of retaining a ‘memory’ of the connexions between events which frequently precede such influences and these influences themselves, and thereby becomes capable of ‘learning’ to perform the appropriate response whenever those signals appear. Relative complex structures which, without this capacity could not exist long, may through it acquire a considerable degree of stability.

5.85. Correct anticipation of future events in the environment can rarely be based on a single present event but will as a rule have to take into account a combination of many present events. It involves thus different responses not only to different individual events but also to different combinations of such events according as they are likely to produce one result or another. Any mechanism which makes the structure respond to different combinations of external events according to the different further events they are likely to produce, implies that there exists inside the structure a system of relationships between events caused by the external circumstances which is in some measure structurally equivalent to the system of relationships which exists between those external events. Such an internal structure which reproduces some of the relations between the outside events we have called a model.

5.86. It is conceivable that a structure endowed with the capacity of retaining experienced connexions might learn separately the appropriate responses to most of the possible combinations of events. But if it had to cope with the complexity of its environment solely by classifying individual events and learning separately for every combination of such events how to respond, both the complexity of the model required and the time needed for building it up would be so great that the extent to which any given structure could learn to adapt itself to varying circumstances would be very limited.

5.87. It is in this connexion that the various processes of multiple classification which we have described, and the phenomena of ‘transfer’ and ‘generalization’ which they make possible, greatly extend the predicting capacity of any models that can be formed from a limited number of elements. Whenever the classifying mechanism treats as alike, or as alike in certain circumstances, any group of events, it will be able to transfer any experience with any one of them to all of them. The process of learning is thereby greatly abbreviated and the complexity of the apparatus required to cope with a given variety of situations is greatly reduced.

5.88. If, for instance, the combinations of any one of the events (a1, a2, a3, . . . ak) with any one of the group of events (b1, b2, b3, . . . bm) and any one of the group of events (c1, c2, c3, . . . cn) produce X, there will be k · m · n (or if k = m = n = 10, one thousand) possible different combinations of events for each of which it would have to be learnt separately that they produce X. But once it has already been learnt that in all other respects all members of class A (i.e., a1, a2, a3, . . . ak) are equivalent, and the symbol o substituted for them, and similarly for all members of the class B the symbol p, and for all members of the class C the symbol q, then the experience that o + p + q produces X will be sufficient to predict the outcome of the m.n.k different combinations of individual events.

5.89. It is thus the process of multiple classification which builds the model. What we have before called the ‘map’, the semi-permanent apparatus of classification, provides the different generic elements from which the models of particular situations are built. The term ‘map’, which suggests a sort of schematic picture of the environment is thus really somewhat misleading. What the apparatus of classification provides is more a sort of inventory of the kind of things of which the world is built up, a theory of how the world works rather than a picture of it. It would be better described as a construction set which supplies the parts from which the models of particular situations can be built.

5.90. The model-building by such an apparatus of classification simplifies the task and extends the scope of successful adaptation in two ways: it selects some elements from a complex environment as relevant for the prediction of events which are important for the persistence of the structure, and it treats them as instances of classes of events. But while in this way a model building apparatus (and particularly one which can be constantly improved by learning) is of much greater efficiency than could be any more mechanical apparatus which contained, as it were, a few fixed models of typical situations, there will clearly still exist definite limits to the extent to which such a microcosm can contain an adequate reproduction of the significant factors in the macrocosm.

5.91. It is, from this angle, no more than a fortunate accident that the different events in the macrocosm are not all fully interdependent to any significant degree, but that as a rule it is possible to base predictions of certain kinds of events on a mere selection from the totality of all events. If it were not possible for practical purposes to isolate quasi-self-contained substructures, containing no more parts which significantly affect the relevant result than can be reproduced, or matched point by point, by ‘representative’ elements within our organism, prediction and purposive adaptation would be impossible. But while it seems that the complexity of the relations which must be taken into account for most purposes are sufficiently limited to make it possible for some structures to ‘contain’ adequate reproductions of them, this can evidently not be universally true. We shall have to concern ourselves in the last chapter with the significance of the fact that any coherent structure of this kind which within itself contains a model guiding its actions, must be of a degree of complexity greater than that of any model that it can contain, and therefore than that of any object it can reproduce.





