2. SIMPLIFYING ASSUMPTIONS ON WHICH THE OPERATION OF THE PRINCIPLE WILL BE DISCUSSED


3.15. In the preceding enumeration of some of the main features of the functioning of the central nervous system certain facts have been deliberately left out which are not required for the very simplified account of its functioning as an instrument of classification which will be attempted here. In particular, we have left out much that would be important if we were to attempt to sketch the temporal pattern of the order of impulses. But although there can be no doubt that this time structure is very important, any attempt to describe it would have to make use of a great deal more of physiological detail than would be compatible with a clear presentation of the outline, or would be justified by the present state of our knowledge of these matters.4

3.16. Even when we leave out this problem of the temporal order of the neural events, the possibilities of classification of impulses which the structure of the neural system provides are of such a manifold character that, in order to obtain a clear picture of how the principle operates, it will be advisable to approach the actual situation by gradual steps. We shall therefore at first employ a number of simplifying assumptions which will later be gradually dropped. The simple models which we shall discuss in the present chapter serve merely to bring out certain salient features of the complex process of classification.

3.17. The first simplifying assumption of this kind which we shall employ provisionally is that we shall consider how a single afferent impulse arriving at the higher centres may here be classified or be discriminated from other similar impulses. This is, of course, a very artificial case, since it is most unlikely that at any moment only one such impulse will arrive, and even doubtful whether, if this ever happened, such an isolated impulse would give rise to a sensation.

3.18. The second simplifying assumption we shall adopt for the present is perhaps even more drastic and unrealistic. We shall concentrate entirely on the order created by connexions formed between sensory neurons and for the time being entirely neglect the connexions established between sensory and motor neurons. The whole problem of the relation between sensation and motor action or behaviour will be taken up only in the next chapter.

3.19. Closely connected with this second simplification is a third which we also shall adopt for the time being, namely the disregard of the hierarchal structure of the central nervous system. We shall, in other words, begin by considering how connexions between sensory neurons might create an order if they were all formed in a single centre or on one and the same level.

3.20. The two last-mentioned simplifications mean, of course, that as a first approximation we shall neglect two facts which are of crucial and decisive importance for the actual functioning of the nervous system. It has rightly become a commonplace in neurophysiology that we must not think in terms of separate sensory and motor mechanisms but rather in terms of a single sensorimotor system. If, nevertheless, at first we treat in isolation that part of the sensory order which might be produced by connexions between the sensory impulses only, and postpone to the next chapter the questions of the interaction between sensory and motor impulses, this is in deliberate contrast to current practice. Our procedure is based on the belief that in recent times the direct connexions between sensory and motor impulses have been rather overstressed at the expense of an adequate recognition of the order which may be determined by connexions within the sensory sphere only.

3.21. When in the course of this chapter we speak of the ‘effects’ of particular sensory impulses we shall therefore refer to their effects on other central processes. These effects may consist in the evocation of other impulses either in neurons which can also be excited by primary impulses, or of impulses in ‘internuncial’ neurons in which an impulse acts, as it were, merely as a symbol or sign for a class of afferent impulses.

3.22. We shall also, for the purposes of the present discussion, continue to disregard one of the main difficulties which a fuller examination of our problem would have to face: the distinction between the phylogenetic and the ontogenetic aspects of the process of the formation of the order of sensory qualities. As we have already mentioned (2.49), it is probable that some of the connexions formed in the development of the species become embedded in the structure of the central nervous system while others will be formed during the life of the individual. For the purposes of the present schematic sketch we shall neglect this distinction and proceed as if the formation of the system of connexions commenced in an individual organism endowed with an apparatus capable of forming such connexions but in which at the outset no such connexions existed.

3.23. Another important question which for lack of sufficient knowledge we must leave undecided, is whether the connexions formed between neurons which simultaneously receive afferent impulses will be direct connexions between these neurons or whether we ought to conceive of them as mediated by other cells which are not directly linked with receptor organs but serve merely as connecting links between other neurons. Such third-cell connexions certainly occur, and from the proportion between the total number of neurons in the cortex and the much smaller number of afferent and efferent fibres (3.4) it would appear that the greater part of the neurons forming the cerebral cortex can have no direct connexions with receptor or effector organs and are likely to perform some such mediating function.

3.24. Finally, it should be remembered throughout the following discussion that when we speak of connexions this will include what we may call ‘potential’ as well as effective connexions, i.e., connexions which transmit impulses which by themselves would not be strong enough to cause excitation of the neurons to which they are conducted, unless they are reinforced (through summation) by other impulses arriving there more or less at the same time, as well as connexions carrying impulses sufficiently strong by themselves to transmit excitation.





