2. EVOLUTION AND THE HIERARCHICAL ORDER OF THE CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM


4.11. The continued existence of those complex structures which we call organisms is made possible by their capacity of responding to certain external influences by such changes in their structure or activity as are required to maintain or restore the balance necessary for their persistence. This involves, even in the most primitive organisms, some capacity of discriminating responses to different physical stimuli, and perhaps even some capacity of ‘learning’,1 although we know very little about the nature of such individual learning (as distinguished from the process of hereditary selection of such individuals as show appropriate adjustments).

4.12. The fact that an organism will respond differently to different external forces acting upon it is, of course, not peculiar to organisms. It would be merely an instance of different causes producing different effects. The peculiar problems presented by organisms appear only where they respond to particular stimuli in the manner which will secure their continued existence, and in so far as they develop specific organs which enable them not only to discriminate between different stimuli, but to react differently to the same stimuli if they appear in different combinations with other stimuli or when the organism itself is in different states.

4.13. It is perhaps worth stressing that the problem of purposive adjustment of organisms to changes arises long before the problem of its purposive behaviour with regard to external objects. The question of what determines (or what is meant by) purposiveness is in the last instance really the same question as that of what ensures the continued existence of the organism. It arises as much in connexion with the normal functioning and growth of the organism, the processes of metabolism and the replacement of damaged parts, as in connexion with those movements of the organism which we commonly describe as behaviour.

4.14. It has already been suggested that in a certain sense any attempt to explain the highly complex kind of purposive action made possible by a developed central nervous system may be premature so long as we do not possess a fully adequate biological theory of the comparatively simpler kind of purposive functioning. Many of the problems often regarded as peculiar to mental phenomena in fact arise already at a much earlier stage, where there can be no question yet of that complex order that is shown in the response to external stimuli which we have described as mind. It cannot be our task here to restate the present position of biological theory with regard to these problems, and we must content ourselves to refer in this connexion to W. B. Cannon’s concept of homeostasis and its development by other authors, and especially to the more recent and most promising work of L. von Bertalanffy. His theory of ‘open systems’ in a steady state (Fliessgleichgewicht) in which ‘equifinality’ prevails because the equilibrium that will be reached will be in some measure be independent of the initial conditions, seems to provide the most helpful contribution to this problem.2 Any further comments we shall have to make with particular reference to the problem of purposiveness will be reserved to the next chapter (5.63–5.76).

4.15. Here we are not directly concerned with the regulative functions of the organism other than those which are effected through the central nervous system. It is merely necessary to remain aware throughout that this system functions within an organism which independently of the former is capable of some adaptive and purposive responses to external causes, responses which are brought about through a system of neuro-chemical regulation. Our task begins essentially where the somatic nervous system makes possible discriminatory responses to a great variety of combinations of stimuli, and particularly where learning becomes the dominant factor.

4.16. The mere fact that the organisms in the course of their evolution develop specific receptor organs which are sensitive only to fairly narrow ranges of stimuli must not be confused with the development of a sensory order and of distinct sensory qualities. It is to be assumed that this development goes hand in hand with the acquisition of different motor responses to the different stimuli. But even an organism which had developed distinct receptors sensitive to all those various stimuli which in a highly developed central nervous system produce different sensory qualities, for that reason could not yet be said to discriminate in terms of a system of sensory qualities similar to that familiar to us.

4.17. While such an organism would perform the simplest kind of classification we have discussed (2.35–2.38), it would still be unable to perform the multiple classifications which alone give rise to the system of sensory qualities. The different stimuli which evoke the different sensory qualities would, if occurring in isolation, all produce different effects, but these different effects would not differ from each other in the specific manner in which the sensory qualities differ from each other.

4.18. The essential characteristic of the order of sensory qualities is that, within that order, each stimulus or group of stimuli does not possess a unique significance represented by the particular response, but that they are given different significance if they occur in combination with, or are evaluated in the light of, an infinite variety of other stimuli which may originate from the external world or from the organism itself.

4.19. Such an order implies that any impulse recording a particular stimulus is connected not merely with one particular motor response, but that some apparatus exists by which the effects of any impulse are adjusted to, and integrated with, the effects of other impulses proceeding within the central nervous system at the same time. In other words, the various sensory impulses, whose effects are thus to be adjusted to each other, must in some manner be brought together before the effect of their joint action is decided.

4.20. This does not mean that individual afferent impulses, or groups of such impulses, might not also be uniquely connected at low levels with certain efferent impulses so that, as soon as the former occur, a particular movement is produced. Such a relation would correspond to the ideal simple reflex arc of traditional theory. In the present context such reflex responses are important mainly because of the proprioceptive impulses by which they in turn will be recorded in the higher centres. The original exteroceptive impulse which sets up such a reflex will in consequence arrive at the centres to which it is conducted already accompanied (or rapidly followed) by a report of the spontaneous response of the organism to the external stimulus. The impulse recording the external stimulus is thus already ‘marked’ as meaning (involving) a certain kind of response.

4.21. This sort of relationship we must suppose to recur in relays, or at many successive stages: the initial sensory impulse at the first stage, the spinal cord, setting up both a motor response and a further afferent impulse proceeding on to the higher centres. At the next level it will arrive together with the report of the motor responses it has produced at the lower level, and with other sensory impulses recording other peripheral stimuli, which may be similarly accompanied by the reports of the reflex responses which they have set up at lower levels. At this stage this particular combination of signals may again produce a distinct motor response, so that at the next higher level the bundle of impulses arriving there will include reports of responses which take already a wider range of exteroceptive impulses into account. And as we ascend to higher and higher levels, both the comprehensiveness of the range of external stimuli which are taken into account in any response, and the number of responses effected at lower levels and reported back to these higher levels will constantly increase.

4.22. It is not difficult to see how such an arrangement for the mutual adjustment of the responses to different simultaneously occurring stimuli is made necessary by the development of specific receptors for different kinds of stimuli. So long as the whole organism was merely susceptible to irritation by a wide range of stimuli, and was capable only of a few simple responses, such as contraction and expansion, no special apparatus for co-ordinating the responses to different stimuli was required. But as soon as specific responses became attached to particular classes of stimuli, the mutual adjustment of these responses according to the significance of the particular combination of stimuli became necessary.

4.23. Between the case where specific responses are uniquely attached to particular stimuli, and the case where all responses are decided in view of all the stimuli, there is, of course, an enormous range of intermediate possibilities. Nor need in a given organism only either the one or the other type of arrangement exist. Some other stimuli will be more likely to affect the appropriateness of a given response to one particular stimulus than will be true of others, and there will be more need—or it may be easier for the organism to provide—for the mutual adjustment between those than between others. We must probably assume that, in the course of evolution, the original direct connexions between particular stimuli and particular responses are being preserved, but that control mechanisms are being superimposed capable of inhibiting or modifying these direct responses when they are inappropriate in view of other simultaneously acting stimuli.

4.24. Parallel with this progressively more complex evaluation of the stimuli in the light of an ever more comprehensive collection of other stimuli, a similar organization will operate on the motor side: instead of simple movements of particular muscles, more and more complex patterns of behaviour will be evoked as a whole; and the groups of impulses which evoke this pattern of movements are probably evoked as groups by a few central impulses which ‘stand for’ the whole pattern (4.48–4.51).

4.25. The sketchy manner in which these questions must be treated here ought not to give the impression that these relations are simple. It is neither to be assumed that comparatively simple patterns of stimulation will normally produce comparatively simple responses, and that the integrative action of the higher centres will operate only when more complicated stimulation patterns are involved; nor that the motor responses are built up in a simple additive manner from the effects of individual impulses producing the movement of individual muscles. It is very likely that, just as more than one afferent impulse will generally be required to produce anything like a ‘simple’ (or sharply discriminated) sensation, so a single efferent impulse will as a rule produce somewhat diffuse movements and only the overlapping of many such impulses will produce a clearly differentiated movement of the separate muscles.3

4.26. The increasing differentiation of the different stimuli from each other, and the accompanying increased variability and complexity of the responses to any subgroups of stimuli, involves, as we have seen, that impulses representative of these stimuli are brought together so that they can act upon each other in a manner which reproduces their significant relations. The more comprehensive this adjustment is, the more elaborate must be the centres set aside from, and capable of overruling the effects of, the more direct connexions between stimulus and response.





