1. CONSCIOUS AND UNCONSCIOUS MENTAL PROCESSES


6.1. We have used the term ‘mental’ to describe all processes which involve a classification of events in terms of a qualitative order, similar to that which we know from our subjective sensory experience, and differing from the physical order of these events. The sphere of ‘mental phenomena’ in this sense is far more extensive than that of conscious phenomena and includes many events which are undoubtedly not conscious. This definition of the mental raises the problem of the determination of this mental order in a form in which it would also arise from a consistently pursued behaviourist approach. We know that an order which is at least similar to that which we know from our conscious experience manifests itself not only in the behaviour of lower animals, with regard to whom we have no ground for assuming that the events so ordered are accompanied by anything which could be described as conscious experience, but also in many responses of our own body where we know that the initiating stimuli do not give rise to any conscious experience.

6.2. Up to this point we have only incidentally referred to the conscious character which distinguishes some of those mental events, and have concentrated on the general character of the qualitative order of all mental events, whether they are conscious or not. What has already been said on this point should justify such a use of the term ‘mental’ as including both unconscious and conscious events, even though in the past such a use of the term has been often explicitly condemned by psychologists (1.73). We must now, however, attempt at least some indication of the additional characteristics or attributes which distinguish conscious from unconscious mental events.

6.3. While all qualitative discriminations thus imply the presence of a mental order in the sense in which we have used this term, it does not necessarily involve that the individual is ‘conscious’ or ‘aware’ of these processes. Consciousness, in the sense in which this term is synonymous with awareness,1 is an attribute which attaches only to some but not to all mental events. But although we all know what we mean when we say that we are ‘conscious’ or ‘aware’ of certain experiences, it is exceedingly difficult to state precisely of what the peculiar attribute of such conscious mental events consists.

6.4. It may be that it is impossible to give a satisfactory definition of what consciousness ‘is’, or rather that this is a phantom-problem of the same kind as the ‘problem’ of the ‘absolute’ character of the sensory qualities. We shall endeavour to avoid this difficulty by not asking what consciousness ‘is’ but by merely inquiring what consciousness does. In other words, we shall be concerned solely with the differences which exist between behaviour which we know to result from conscious mental processes and behaviour produced by unconscious mental processes. Before examining this question in any detail, three propositions may be stated which will probably command fairly general assent.

6.5. It seems clear, in the first instance, that, although the distinction between conscious and non-conscious processes refers originally to different kinds of processes occurring in ourselves, we also employ it to describe the differences which we observe in the behaviour of other people. We know from our subjective experience that there are differences between those actions of our body which we ‘deliberately’ control and those which take place without our control, and we use this knowledge to distinguish similarly between correspondingly different actions of other people. Although we possess no certain criterion on which we can base this distinction, we are sufficiently familiar with the two kinds of actions to be able to attribute consciousness with fair assurance to persons whom we observe acting in certain ways.

6.6. There can, secondly, be little question, although in extreme instances the difference between conscious and unconscious mental events appears to be so complete as to make the difference appear to be one of kind, that there exist many forms intermediate between fully conscious and fully unconscious mental events which make this difference one of degree. Consciousness is evidently capable of many different degrees of intensity, and between the clearly conscious and the clearly unconscious states there exist many forms of semiconscious events with regard to which it is difficult to decide whether they ought to be described as conscious or not.2

6.7. Thirdly, it will probably be readily conceded that all conscious events possess in the highest degree the attributes characteristic of all mental processes: conscious responses are to an especially high degree modifiable and purposive, different conscious events are very closely related to each other and very fully discriminated from each other; furthermore, this discrimination is even less ‘specific’ and more ‘general’, in the sense in which we have used these terms (5.36, 5.49) than is true of other mental phenomena; and they are even more likely to produce completely new complexes of behaviour than is true of unconscious mental processes.





