5. THE FUNCTIONS OF CONSCIOUSNESS


6.29. The phenomenon of attention is of special significance for the understanding of consciousness because in the case of attention as well as in that of consciousness, it is not merely the character of the particular stimulus, or the place of the impulse in the network of connexions, which will determine whether it will or will not become conscious or receive our attention; but it will be the preexisting excitatory state of the higher centres which will decide whether the evaluation of the new impulses will be of the kind characteristic of attention or consciousness. It will depend on the predisposition (or set) how fully the newly arriving impulses will be evaluated or whether they will be consciously perceived, and what the responses to them will be.

6.30. It is probable that the processes in the highest centres which become conscious require the continuous support from nervous impulses originating at some source within the nervous system itself, such as the ‘wakefulness centre’ for whose existence a considerable amount of physiological evidence has been found.7 If this is so, it would seem probable also that it is these reinforcing impulses which, guided by the expectations evoked by pre-existing conditions, prepare the ground and decide on which of the new impulses the searchlight beam of full consciousness and attention will be focused. The stream of impulses which is thus strengthened becomes capable of dominating the processes in the highest centre, and of overruling and shutting out from full consciousness all the sensory signals which do not belong to the object on which attention is fixed, and which are not themselves strong enough (or perhaps not sufficiently in conflict with the underlying outline picture of the environment) to attract attention.

6.31. There would thus appear to exist within the central nervous system a highest and most comprehensive centre at which at any one time only a limited group of coherent processes can be fully evaluated; where all these processes are related to the same spatial and temporal framework; where the ‘abstract’ or generic relations form a closely knit order in which individual objects are placed; and where, in addition, a close connexion with the instruments of communication has not only contributed a further and very powerful means of classification, but has also made it possible for the individual to participate in a social or conventional representation of the world which he shares with his fellows.

6.32. Of these various characteristics of consciousness the predominance of ‘abstract’ features requires further discussion. This will be combined in the next two sections with some further examination of the nature of abstract thought.





