1. PRE-SENSORY EXPERIENCE OR ‘LINKAGES’


5.1. In the preceding chapters we have given the general outline of the principle by which a set of neural impulses in principle may become organized in a manner analogous to the familiar order of the mental qualities. We shall now have to try and fill in this outline by a sketch of the process by which this order is formed, and of the general character of that order itself.

5.2. This account of the formation of the mental order will still have to be extremely schematic, in the sense that we shall not attempt more than a general indication of a possible way in which such an order may be built up, without attempting to show in what manner this will happen in any particular organism. We shall also still have largely to disregard the distinction between the part of this process which takes place in the course of the development of the single individual, and the part which takes place in the course of the development of the species and the results of which will be embedded in the structure of the individual organism when it commences its independent life (or when it reaches maturity).

5.3. There is at present still very little knowledge available which would enable us to draw such a distinction between the part of the mental order which for the individual is determined by its inherited constitution and the part which for it may be regarded as being of experiential origin.1 But as we are concerned with the genesis of mind as such, it is comparatively unimportant what for the individual are constitutional and what are experiential factors; indeed, it is at least likely that what for one species or at one developmental stage may be of experiential origin, may in other instances be constitutionally determined. What is important for our purposes is that it would appear that the principle which determines the formation of the mental order may operate either in the ontogenetic or in the phylogenetic process. Such an assumption of a general similarity between the kind of processes which take place in the evolution of the species and in that of the individual does, of course, in no way prejudge the issues of the great controversies on the mechanism of evolution.

5.4. For the purposes of the following schematic exposition we shall, therefore, proceed as if at the commencement of the life of the individual the structure of the central nervous system were fully completed before any connexions between neurons corresponding to the simultaneous occurrence of stimuli had been established. This means in effect that we shall disregard the possibility of the transmission from generation to generation of connexions in the higher nervous centres which constitute adaptations to the environment; and that we shall treat a process as if it took place in the development of the single individual which in fact probably occurs to a large extent in the course of the development of the species. This assumption perhaps may be justified in some measure in so far as the highest centres are concerned, but it certainly does not apply to the connexions existing at the lower levels, which form an essential part in the complete process of classification.

5.5. An afferent impulse arriving for the first time at the higher centres of such a system would thus not yet possess any connexions with other such impulses and therefore not yet occupy a definite position in the order of such impulses, or have a distinct functional significance. But since every occurrence of a combination of such impulses will contribute to the gradual formation of a network of connexions of ever-increasing density, every neuron will gradually acquire a more and more clearly defined place in the comprehensive system of such connexions, and with it a distinct functional significance which in a great many ways will differ from that of other impulses.

5.6. In a certain sense it might be said that the qualitative distinctions which will thus be built up between the significance of the different impulses are created by ‘experience’. In doing so, however, we should have to be aware that we are using the term ‘experience’ in a somewhat special sense. Since the impulses between which these first connexions are formed would not yet occupy a place in an order of sensory qualities, and no such order would yet exist, their occurrence could not yet be described as experience in the ordinary meaning of this term. It would not yet represent a mental event but would be a purely physiological event because it would possess none of the attributes which give it a place in a mental or qualitative order.

5.7. The term ‘experience’ in this connexion is thus somewhat ambiguous and misleading, because it suggests the occurrence of sensory qualities, while the phenomenon with which we are concerned is a kind of pre-sensory2 experience which only creates the apparatus which later makes qualitative distinctions possible. To avoid the misleading connotations which attach to the term experience it will therefore be expedient to employ a more neutral term to describe the formation of new connexions by the simultaneous occurrence of several afferent impulses. We shall for that purpose adopt as the technical term the word ‘linkage’.

5.8. By a linkage we shall thus understand the most general lasting effect which groups of stimuli can impress upon the organization of the central nervous system. It implies a physiological effect of external events on that organization, but not necessarily that when these external events occur they already possess any distinct significance for the organism. It is a sort of learning to discriminate which may occur before any discriminations are yet possible, an ‘experience’ which, though it will later, when the same stimuli occur again, give them special significance for the organism, need at the time as yet have no meaning for the individual.

5.9. When we stress that events producing these linkages need not be in any sense mental or sensory events, we of course do not merely mean that they need not be conscious. It must be remembered that we employ here the term ‘mental’ in a sense which is wider than, and includes, the conscious (1.67–1.73). The events between which linkages occur need not possess even such a place in the mental order which would make them mental events in this wider sense.

5.10. In some respects it might have been preferable instead of introducing the clumsy new term ‘linkage’, to revive in the same technical sense the old term ‘impression’. But this term not only is so much charged with the meaning of a mental experience that it seemed better to avoid it, but it also seemed desirable to choose a term which expressly stressed that all such experience which can give rise to memory must always consist in the creation of connexions between several physiological events. And since all memory consists in the linking of two or more such events it seemed better to describe the effect which produces memory by a term referring to the creation of such links.

5.11. Although it may sound commonplace that all experience, in the widest sense of the term, causes, and that all memory is based on, the creation of connexions between physiological events representing stimuli, this still requires emphasis, since there exists another view which, just because it is rarely explicitly stated, yet exercises considerable influence and is one of the main supports of the idea of a special mental substance. This view is what might be called the ‘storage’ theory of memory, the conception that with every experience some new mental entity representing sensations or images enters the mind or the brain and is there retained until it is returned at the appropriate moment.

5.12. This conception is, of course, part and parcel of the theory of the absolute character of sensory qualities, and connected with the erroneous interpretation of the theory of the specific energy of the nerves, according to which the nature of the process in the different fibres determines the quality of the resulting sensation. Against it we should remember that we know of no physiological mechanism which can retain anything except connexions between different events, and that, therefore, any theory of mind which is to be expressed in physiological terms must use ‘experience’ and ‘memory’ in the sense which we stress by employing the term ‘linkage.’

5.13. The theory here developed then assumes that every sensory quality which occurs presupposes the previous occurrence of linkages between impulses which may not yet have been classified as belonging to a particular qualitative group. Even after relatively simple systems of connexions, effecting some measure of classification, have been formed, this system will be constantly modified by new linkages. But as the existing system of connexions becomes more and more complex and more firmly embedded, any new linkage will be less likely to alter its general character.

5.14. One important consequence of this relation between physiological linkages and sensory experience is that there will be implicit in all sensory experience certain relations determined by earlier linkages (i.e., by the influence of the external world on the organism) which have never been the object of sensory experience in the ordinary meaning of this term; and that the order of sensory qualities will be subject to continuous modification by new linkages between impulses which may not lead to sense experience. The epistemological significance of this fact will be examined in the last chapter (8.1–8.27).

5.15. The terminological point discussed in this section has some bearing on the question whether our theory of the determination of sensory qualities can be properly described as ‘empiricist’. It seems that in the dispute between the ‘empiricists’ and the ‘nativists’ there were really two different issues involved. The first is whether, so far as the individual is concerned, the order of sensory qualities is congenital or acquired by individual experience. On this probably no general answer is possible. The second is, whether the whole sensory order can be conceived as having been built up by the experience of the race or the individual, i.e. whether it is based on the retention of connexions between effects exercised upon them by the external world. With regard to this second question our answer is definitely empiricist (2.16).

5.16. It might at first seem as if this empiricist character of our theory would stand in irreconcilable contrast to the strongly anti-empiricist attitude of the gestalt school with whose arguments our theory is in other respects in close agreement. I am not certain, however, that the opposition of the gestalt school to an empiricist explanation of gestalt qualities as being ‘built up’ by experience from sensory ‘elements’ need apply to a theory which, as the theory developed here, traces all sensory qualities, ‘elementary’ as well as gestalt qualities, to the pre-sensory formation of a network of connexions based on linkages between non-mental elements.





