6. THE UNIVERSAL CHARACTER OF THE PROCESS OF CLASSIFICATION: GESTALT PHENOMENA AND ABSTRACT CONCEPTS


3.71. The fact that relations between the parts of the total sensory situation, which individually may be quite unlike each other, may yet be recognized as similar, of course, is the most general aspect of the problem of gestalt. But while the significance of the phenomenon has come to be generally appreciated mainly as the result of the work of the gestalt school, it is by now recognized by practically all schools of psychology. That in perception we do not merely add together given sensory elements, and that complex perceptions possess attributes which cannot be derived from the discernible attributes of the separate parts, is one of the conclusions most strongly emphasized by practically all recent developments in psychology.

3.72. As we have seen, it is, in fact, no more difficult to explain why different impulses caused by different combinations of stimuli, which singly would occupy altogether different positions in the whole system of relations, should as combinations occupy similar positions in that system, than why different single impulses produced by different physical stimuli should acquire the same or a similar functional significance. That the problem of gestalt perception was singled out as a special problem was largely due to the fact that it was still widely believed that the ‘elementary’ sensory qualities were somehow originally, and in a manner either not requiring or not capable of explanation, attached to the elementary nervous impulses. The fight which even before the rise of the gestalt school some psychologists had conducted against the ‘mosaic psychology’, which conceived the more complex phenomena as built up from mental elements corresponding to the physiological elements,10 was, however, bound to be unsuccessful so long as the purely relative character of all sensory qualities was not recognized.

3.73. With regard to the more complex sensory phenomena our theory leads indeed to conclusions very similar to those of the gestalt school. This, however, is so because our approach leads us to raise with regard to all sensory qualities, even those presumed to be the most ‘elementary’, the same question which the gestalt school raised with regard to configurations. Once we are led to account even for what used to be regarded as ‘simple’ or ‘elementary sensory qualities by the principles outlined here, gestalt phenomena and ‘abstractions’ do not raise any fundamentally new or different problem.

3.74. As a result of the work of the gestalt school the view has now become widely accepted that sensory qualities must not be regarded as atomic fact but should be conceived as determined by the ‘organization of the field’. It may be suggested that the theory of the determination of sensory qualities here developed gives this somewhat vague conception of the ‘organization of the field’ a precise meaning; and, at the same time, that it takes this whole approach some steps further by making it clear, firstly, that the ‘organization of the field’ is based on, and is in principle capable of explanation in terms of, causal connexions between physiological impulses; and, secondly, that this organization of the field is not additional to the qualities of any kind of atomic sensations (as most of the discussion of ‘perceptual organization’ still implies), but that it is the structure of that field which determines the peculiar functional significance of the individual impulse, or groups of impulses, which we know as their sensory qualities.

3.75. The conception of the ‘organized field’ is usually applied to the system of qualities belonging to one particular sense or modality. For our purposes it will be necessary to interpret its meaning more widely and to include in the conception not only the relations between the different qualities belonging to the same modality, but also the relations which exist between the qualities belonging to different modalities (1.56–1.67). The fact that the whole system of sensory qualities must in this sense be regarded as one organized field need not prevent us, however, from occasionally speaking of different fields as sub-systems of the more comprehensive system—sub-systems within which the elements are differentiated by a more dense and complex system of relations.

3.76. In treating the so-called elementary sensations and the more complex sensory phenomena as instances of the same process, and, therefore, as being capable of being explained by recourse to the same principle, we arrive (again in agreement with the views of the gestalt school) at the conclusion that there is no substantial difference between the acts of ‘sensation’ and of ‘perception’: both appear as essentially similar and, as we shall see later, they constitute merely different stages in an even more comprehensive range of processes, all of which can be interpreted as acts of classification (or evaluation) performed by the central nervous system. We shall therefore henceforth use the terms ‘perception’ and ‘perceiving’ in their popular meaning in which they include the experiencing of ‘elementary’ sensory qualities as well as the perception of shapes, objects, etc.11

3.77. It will be shown later (6.44–6.50) that the principle used to explain these phenomena applies also to the so-called ‘higher’ mental processes such as the formation of abstract concepts and conceptual thought. With regard to those we are, of course, more familiar with the interpretation as processes of classification in which classes of events, or classes of such classes, interact in a complex manner. It should be noted, however, that if what are called abstractions are most easily accounted for as classes of classes, etc., this does not mean that they must always be secondary, in the sense of being derived from previous conscious experience. The perception of an abstract feature of a situation may in some measure be independent of the perception of the ‘concrete’ elements of which that situation may seem to be made up (6.40).

3.78. The processes of classification and re-classification on successive levels, and the ‘higher’ mental processes corresponding to them, will have to be considered further (Chapters V and VI) in connexion with the whole process of the building up of the system of connexions as a whole. Before we can turn to this, however, we must consider another source of classification which, in consequence of the simplifying assumptions made, we have so far disregarded.





