4. POSSIBILITIES OF EXPERIMENTAL REFUTATION


7.52. It will assist further to define the content of our main thesis if we state briefly the main alternative theories whose confirmation would at the same time disprove the theory here developed.

7.53. Disregarding all those theories which, like parallelism, assume the existence of some mind-substance and which are unverifiable almost by definition, the first of the alternative theories which might be mentioned is that of a cell-memory or of the ‘storage’ of impressions in the individual cell, such as underlies R. Semon’s conception of the ‘engram’.42 This conception implies of course, the assumption that whatever it is that is thus stored possesses by itself the different attributes by which different sensory qualities are distinguished. Although it is difficult to see how this assumption could ever be experimentally verified, its confirmation would, of course, refute our theory and in fact eliminate the problem which the latter is intended to solve.

7.54. A more direct refutation of our theory would be obtained by the discovery of such differences in the physical properties transmitted by the different nerve fibres that these could be said to correspond to the differences in the sensory qualities produced by those impulses—that is, if the theory of the specific energy of nerves in what we have called its illegitimate interpretation (1.33) should prove to be correct. It was by suggesting the search for such physiological differences between the individual impulses that the theoretical views widely held in the past have posed a problem to physiological research to which, if our view is correct, no answer can be found.

7.55. A special modern form of that theory is the resonance theory developed (for efferent nervous impulses) by P. Weiss43 which suggests that it is not the fact of a transmission of impulses through special pathways but rather the character of the impulses in some fibres which determines that similar impulses are being set up in other distant fibres. This view, if proved correct for afferent impulses, would also disprove most of the present theory. The same would be true if the views of some modern gestaltists were confirmed, who seem to suggest that it is not the topological position of the group of impulses in the whole structure of connexions but the spatial configuration44 of these impulses, irrespective of the particular fibres in which they occur, which counts.

7.56. Finally we might mention as a conceivable alternative theory, although it seems doubtful whether it has ever been carried to its ultimate consequences, the view that sensory discrimination is determined entirely by peripheral motor events. Although we do certainly not wish to minimize the importance of motor responses at all the various levels of the hierarchy of the central nervous system, it is difficult to see how they should ever make those central ‘symbolic’ or classificatory processes unnecessary with whose functions we were mainly concerned.





