3. FROM SPECIFIC REFLEX TO GENERALIZED EVALUATION


4.27. It is doubtful whether the ideal simple reflex arc, where the impulse from a single afferent fibre is transmitted to a single efferent fibre, is of any importance, and even whether it occurs at all. But between it as the one extreme ideal type and the other extreme of the ‘voluntary’ or ‘conscious’ responses there exists probably a continuous range of connexions between stimuli and responsies of intermediate types in which processes of classification take place which are more or less analogous to those which determine the system of sensory qualities. The simplest of these intermediate cases which is of interest is that in which a particular motor response becomes attached to every one of a group of sensory impulses, so that any one of the latter will be transmitted to the motor fibre and produce the response in question. This represents the simplest possible instance where we can speak of a classification of the stimuli.

4.28. The operation of this simple kind of classification is familiar from the experiments with conditioned reflexes and from the phenomenon known as generalization. It has been found tha after a conditioned response has been developed to one stimulus, other ‘similar’ stimuli may also elicit the same response.4 In these instances the grouping of certain impulses as similar has the effect that further impulses which become connected to some of these impulses become also attached to the other impulses forming the group.

4.29. A higher degree of selection or classification is reached when several responses are alternatively connected with each of a given group of sensory impulses, so that which of these responses will be elicited by a particular stimulus depends on which of a number of other sensory impulses occur at the same time with the former. Which response will be produced in this case by any sensory stimulus will depend on what other stimuli accompany it, and any particular sensory impulse may in some context produce results which are similar to those produced by others, and in other contexts produce results which are different.

4.30. On the lower levels on which connexions of this still relatively simple or quasi-reflex type prevail, there will thus already exist some sort of qualitative ordering or discrimination. But it will be greatly limited in two respects: it will involve selective responses to the stimulation of particular sensory receptors for only a very few kinds of responses: and it will select between this limited number of possible responses only with regard to a limited number of simultaneously occurring other stimuli.

4.31. While on these lower levels the discrimination may thus be fairly detailed in so far as it refers to particular responses or functions, it will be specific in the sense that it will be effective only with regard to a particular group of responses, and take into account only a comparatively small range of stimuli. In the famous case of the decapitated frog which is still capable of wiping a drop of acid from its back, the signal evoked by the drop of acid will be sufficiently discriminated as regards location to guide the movement of the leg. But the localization of the stimulus which this proves will probably be specific in the sense of being effective only with respect to this particular response.

4.32. Such limited classification may be effected in subcentres which offer the opportunity for connexions among a limited number of sensory and motor fibres. As the impulse is transmitted to higher and more comprehensive centres, there will arise opportunities for more extensive connexions, and with them will appear the possibility of a more complex discrimination both with regard to the range of different responses and to the variety of stimuli which will contribute to the decision which of the potential responses will take place.

4.33. The increasing opportunities for connexions between fibres carrying sensory impulses from different parts of the body, and the correspondingly increased comprehensiveness of the net of connexions which can be formed on the higher levels, does mean neither that at these higher centres the individual stimuli must always be represented by individual impulses as they are on the lower levels, nor that the lower level connexions are confined to impulses belonging to the same sense modality.5 It means merely that at the lower levels only such other sensory impulses will generally be able to modify the response to a particular impulse as are most immediately relevant to the interpretation of (or most frequently associated with) the particular stimulus; while at the higher levels a wider range of less immediately significant other factors will have an opportunity of modifying the result. Similarly, the increasing comprehensiveness of the connexions possible at the higher levels need not mean the possibility of connexions with a larger number of individual impulses, but may mean merely the possibility of connexions with impulses representing a greater variety of stimuli.

4.34. The responses to any given stimulus thus become at the higher levels more and more liable to be modified by the influence of impulses from other sources. The continuous range of connexions between the simple reflex and conscious action thus becomes one in which an ever-increasing number of different stimuli contribute jointly in determining the response. Even though we are directly familiar only with the classification of stimuli which lead to behaviour that is conscious, and in which this comprehensiveness of the stimuli taken into account has presumably reached the highest degree, at least a great part of observable behaviour is probably guided by processes which are intermediate between this and reflex action.





