4. COMPLEX FORMS OF CLASSIFICATION


3.35. Even as a result of the comparatively simple processes discussed in the last section each impulse would become the member not merely of one class but of as many distinct classes as will correspond, not only to the number of other impulses which constitute its following, but in addition also to the number of possible combinations (pairs, triples, quadruples, etc.) of such other impulses; it might have any such part of its following in common with different groups of other impulses and therefore form a distinct class with them. We obtain thus already a somewhat complex form of ‘multiple’ classification in the first of the senses distinguished before (2.39–2.40).

3.36. Attention should be directed already at this stage to a circumstance which will have to be further considered at a later point (3.52ff.), namely, the fact that the kind of classificatory processes which we are now considering differ from those performed by the machines discussed earlier in one important respect. In the instances which we are now considering, the classificatory responses are not different in kind from, but are events of the same sort as, those which are the object of classification. In consequence, it is possible that one and the same event may appear both as an object of classification and as an act of classification. The impulse produced by a peripheral stimulus is ‘classified’ by evoking other impulses which might also be produced by peripheral stimuli. We shall see that it is a consequence of this relationship between the classifying and the classified impulses that a process of classification can produce ‘models’ of extremely complex relationships between stimuli, and indeed can reproduce the order of any conceivable structure.

3.37. In accordance with the distinction we have drawn between ‘effective’ and ‘potential’ connexions between neurons (3.24) we shall also have to distinguish between that part of the following of an impulse which will always occur whenever that impulse occurs, and that part which is merely ‘potential’ and which will appear only if the tendency towards an excitation of the neurons constituting the ‘potential’ following is supported by other impulses operating towards the same effect.

3.38. In the extreme case where the following acquired by any one neuron of a given class is completely identical with that of the other members of the class, their individual position in the whole system of connexions and therefore their functional significance would also be identical. This result is possible but not likely to occur frequently. When I was first working on these problems I thought I had found an instance of such undistinguishable sensations caused by stimuli operating on different receptors in the case of pressure on teeth standing opposite each other; I am no longer in a position to verify this. Such pressure seemed to me indistinguishable so far as immediate experience was concerned, and I was able to decide which tooth was concerned only by calling in further sensory experience, such as touching the teeth individually with my fingers. This case would, of course, satisfy the condition that the two stimuli almost always occur together.

3.39. There are undoubtedly other instances where stimuli, although they set up impulses in distinct fibres, remain indistinguishable. As a rule, however, we find that even very similar sensations caused by the stimulation of different receptors differ from each other, if in no other way, at least by an awareness of the different points at which they occur, or by what used to be called their ‘local sign’. If we are to account for these differences between the effects of impulses which produce sensation otherwise of the same quality, we shall, in addition to the common following which accounts for their similar quality, have to find differences which account for their assignment to different points in space.

3.40. If we examine this problem at first in connexion with vision we enter a field where the kind of explanation which we are attempting to apply generally was first used to account for a special problem: ever since Bishop Berkeley the connexions between the impulses registering the visual stimuli on the retina and the kinesthetic impulses recording the tension of the muscles used for focusing the eye have been employed for explaining the spatial order of sensations. A particular visual impulse may have acquired exactly the same connexions with other visual impulses and thus be classified as differing qualitatively in the same manner from all other visual stimuli, and yet it may differ from the former by being connected with a different set of kinesthetic impulses.

3.41. The use we shall make of this fact, however, will in two respects differ from that made of it in the Berkeley-Helmholtz-Mach theory of spatial vision. Firstly, the impulses registering the state of muscular tension will not be conceived as producing distinct sensations but will be considered merely as physiological events which are associated with, and evoked by, the visual stimuli, and which contribute to the peculiar effects which the latter are capable of producing.

3.42. Secondly, what we shall regard as connected with the visual impulses will not be the actual movements of the eye muscles but merely the sensory impulses which normally record such movements in the central nervous system but which may also occur, if they are associatively evoked by the visual impulses, without the eye movements actually occurring. It would, therefore, not be a valid objection against this interpretation if it were pointed out that the movements of the eye postulated by the traditional theory do not, in fact, take place.

3.43. The theory of spatial vision serves here merely as an example of the manner in which the spatial order of sensations can in general be accounted for. And even this in turn is significant for us mainly as an illustration of the even more general way in which most specific acts of sensation require particular postures or attitudes of the body in order that the characteristic quality of the sensation should be produced. This fact will have to be considered further in the next chapter (4.35–4.44).

3.44. At this point the artificial separation of the connexions existing between different sensory impulses from those between them and motor impulses becomes difficult to maintain. We have already been forced to take into account the motor responses usually accompanying the acts of perception—motor responses which are probably directed from some lower level of the central nervous system, and which in turn will give rise to kinesthetic and other proprioceptive impulses which will become part of the following of the initial sensory impulse. These matters, however, can only be considered further at a later stage.

3.45. The common spatial order,6 which is part of the common order of all sensations, serves here merely as an instance of the great variety of relations between different sensory impulses which will help to build up that order. The bundles of connexions or the following which any one of several sensory neurons may acquire can differ from those of others in an almost infinite variety of ways, ranging from complete identity of their following to complete absence of any common connexions; and every difference in the connexions which the individual neurons possess will have its peculiar functional significance.

3.46. To the possibilities of functional differentiation of the different impulses by connexions transmitting excitation, we have to add the effects of the second kind of connexions mentioned earlier, namely those transmitting inhibition (3.10). In whatever manner such inhibitory connexions may be acquired in the first instance and later transferred, their existence extends the range of possible differences in the position which any one impulse may occupy in the whole system of connexions: it adds the possibility of different impulses having effects which are directly opposed to each other. In such instances the evocation of certain other impulses normally following upon the occurrence of a given impulse would be prevented if still other impulses occurred at the same time. The range of functional differentiation of the impulses which may be determined by the differences in their following is thus extended, from equality through various degrees of similarity and difference, to contrariness and complete opposition.

3.47. The significance of the differences in the following which different neurons will have acquired will show itself in the differences between the effects which the impulses occurring in them will produce in different circumstances. The manner in which any newly arriving impulse will modify the existing excitatory state of the whole nervous system, and in which it will combine its effects with those of all other simultaneously arriving impulses, will depend on the different followings of all those impulses. The further course through which any one bundle of impulse-chains will run will be determined by the following of each successive impulse and by the manner in which the impulses of this following will combine with (i.e., reinforce or inhibit) other impulses proceeding at the same time (see 5.53).

3.48. In the complex interplay of many chains of impulses proceeding at the same time, the identity of the greater part of the followings which two or more neurons possess will bring it about that the occurrence of any one of them will in most situations produce the same or similar results, and that their simultaneous occurrence will tend to reinforce those parts of their following which they have in common.

3.49. Such a system, in which each of a set of events is connected with many others in such a way that the occurrence of any one or of any group of them causes (or contributes to bring about) the occurrence of certain others, evidently performs classifications in the sense in which we have defined this term. All the impulses or groups of impulses which evoke the same other impulses will belong to the same ‘class’ because they have this particular effect in common. Individual impulses or groups of impulses will of course almost always belong to a great many different classes, that is, multiple classification in the first of the different senses we have distinguished (2.40) will be the rule.

3.50. Since the different individual impulses will become members of a class through the fact that each of them evokes the same other impulses, it seems permissible to say that the latter represent the common attribute of the members of the class—though it would be more correct to say that they constitute that attribute. The classification is effected by the evocation of certain other impulses, and the latter serve, as it were, as the ‘signs’ or ‘symbols’ representing the class; the expression ‘representative processes in the brain’ which has been much used in recent physiological psychology,7 can therefore appropriately be applied to them.

3.51. It has been suggested above (2.20–2.31, 2.44) that the mechanism which we are considering can be conceived either ‘statically’, as an apparatus capable of performing classifications, or ‘dynamically’, as a process of classification. In the preceding discussion we have sometimes spoken in terms of the former, e.g., when we spoke of connexions between neurons through which impulses are transmitted, and sometimes in terms of the latter, when we spoke of the impulses evoking each other. These two aspects of the same phenomenon correspond to the two aspects of the system of sensory qualities which we discussed then. It should now be clear that it is the dynamic aspect which is the really relevant one and that the static view is merely a method which is sometimes convenient to use for describing the potential operations of the system.





