1. THE PRINCIPLE OF THE EXPLANATION


2.1. The first chapter led to the conclusion that the sensory qualities known to us from our subjective experience form a self-contained system so that we can describe any one of these qualities only in terms of its relations to other such qualities, and that many of these relations themselves also belong to the qualitative order. This means that, if in our attempt toward an explanation we are not to move in a circle but are to succeed in explaining the relation of this system of qualities to the world of physics, the object of our explanation must be the whole complex of relations which determine the order of the system of sensory (or rather of mental) qualities. In order to provide such an explanation, it will be necessary to show how in a physical system known forces can produce such differentiating relationships between its elements that an order will appear which strictly corresponds to the order of the sensory qualities.

2.2. The only way in which we can break the circle in which we move so long as we discuss sensory qualities in terms of each other, and can hope to arrive at an explanation of the processes of which the occurrence of sensory qualities forms a part, therefore, is to construct a system of physical elements which is ‘topologically equivalent’ or ‘isomorphous’ with the system of sensory qualities; this means that the relations of the former must strictly reproduce the relations prevailing in the latter so that the effect of any groups of events in the former will correspond to the effects of the corresponding group of events in the latter.

2.3. The mathematical concept of isomorphism has been used by the members of the gestalt school1 in a sense somewhat similar to that in which it is employed here. The use made of it by that school is, however, somewhat ambiguous and imprecise and I am not certain whether it is the same as that employed here. It is therefore important to remember that, whenever the term isomorphism is used in the following discussion, it will be used in its strict mathematical meaning of a structural correspondence between systems of related elements in which the relations connecting these elements possess the same formal properties, rather than in any sense borrowed directly from the gestalt school.

2.4. It is especially important to realize that the isomorphism of two structures does not, as some of the discussions by the gestalt school suggest, imply similarity of their arrangement in space. Although two three-dimensional structures which are similar in the geometrical meaning of this term will also be isomorphous, such spatial similarity is not necessary. If the relevant relationship is, e.g., connectedness, and we conceive of a three dimensional net or lattice of rubber threads in which the knots represent the elements and the threads the connexions, isomorphism will be preserved however much we stretch, twist or crumple up the net. Since in this process of spatial distortion the relevant relations between the elements are preserved so long as no thread is broken and no new knots formed, all these various states of the net or lattice would be isomorphous. It will have to be remembered throughout this book that whenever we speak, e.g., of a ‘pattern within the brain’, the term pattern and similar terms will have to be understood in this topological and not in a spatial meaning.

2.5. The importance of not interpreting isomorphism as spatial similiarity will be seen from the fact, for instance, that in a system in which the position of one element is determined by the connexions with other elements, two distinct elements may occupy identical positions, which is clearly impossible in a spatial sense. Two distinct points in space cannot have identical spatial relations to every one of a group of other points, but each of two distinct elements of a merely ‘connexional’ order can be connected with the identical set of other elements. This in fact applies not only to individual elements but also to subgroups of connected elements within the larger structure which, without being isomorphous with each other, may yet, considered as groups, occupy identical places in the larger structure, i.e., may as a group of elements have connexions with the same other elements.

2.6. Isomorphism thus describes only a similarity of structures as wholes and of the position of corresponding elements within the structure, but says nothing about any other properties of the corresponding elements apart from their position in the structure. Such individual properties of the elements from which the structure is built are totally irrelevant for the question of whether the two structures are isomorphous; and isomorphism may not only exist between structures made of different materials but even between material and immaterial structures so long as there exist any common formal attributes of the relations which connect the elements.

2.7. In the application of the concept of isomorphism to psychological problems there has been a good deal of confusion with regard to the terms or structures which might be said to be isomorphous. There are three such different structures, any pair of which might be and has been represented as the terms between which isomorphism prevails. There are:

1. The physical order of the external world, or of the physical stimuli, which for the present purpose we must assume to be known, although our knowledge of it is, of course, imperfect.

2. The neural order of the fibres, and of the impulses proceeding in these fibres, which, though undoubtedly part of the complete physical order, is yet a part of it which is not directly known but can only be reconstructed.

3. The mental or phenomenal order of sensations (and other mental qualities) directly known although our knowledge of it is largely only a ‘knowing how’ and not a ‘knowing that’,2 and although we may never be able to bring out by analysis all the relations which determine that order.

2.8. Our problem is determined partly by the fact that the first and third of these orders are not isomorphous, i.e., that the physical order differs from the phenomenal order. Although the problem would also exist if these two orders were isomorphous (if that is conceivable), we might never, or at least not for a long time, have become aware of its character if it were not for the fact of the difference of these two orders. While they are in some measure similar, and while we owe it to this similarity that we can find our way about the physical world, they are, as we have seen, far from being identical.

2.9. The isomorphism which we have suggested to exist refers to the relation between the second and the third of these orders, i.e., to the relation between the neural and the phenomenal order. If this is correct, and if the first and the third of these orders are not isomorphous, it also follows that the first and the second cannot be isomorphous. (That the second cannot be be strictly isomorphous with the first also follows from the fact that strictly speaking it is a part of the first).

2.10. Isomorphism between two structures or orders does not imply isomorphism between any properties their elements may possess apart from their place in the structure. This needs special emphasis as the term isomorphism has been used by Boring3 to describe a correspondence between individual mental events (i.e., parts of our third order) and individual physical and neural events. He speaks of ‘isomorphic transmission’ of some constant structural feature from the stimulus through the impulse to the sensation, and in this sense the concept of isomorphism would indeed, as he points out, be merely a form of the naïve conception against which Johannes Müller’s theory of the specific energy of nerves was directed. It is possible that in the vague use made of the concept by the gestalt school this meaning has been mixed up with the other one, but it need hardly be stressed that it has nothing to do with the sense in which the concept is employed here.

2.11. It should be pointed out at once, however, that our use of the term isomorphism, though useful for the purposes of exposition at this stage, will in the end also prove somewhat inappropriate. We are at present concerned with the relations of an inferred order, the terms of which are unknown (since they are left without attributes if we regard all mental attributes as determined by relations), with an order which might be established between the known neural elements. We shall, in fact, come to the conclusion that the two orders are not merely isomorphous but identical and that to postulate a separate set of terms for the mental order would be redundant. But at this step in the exposition we shall content ourselves to ask whether a topological equivalent of the mental order can be reconstructed from physical elements.

2.12. Another misunderstanding to which the use of the conception of a one-to-one correspondence in the discussion of isomorphism could give rise, should at once be met. It is the old idea that individual stimuli and individual nervous impulses are invariably and uniquely related with particular individual sensory qualities. This cardinal error which, it will soon be seen, has been the main obstacle to the understanding of our problem, follows by no means from the conception of isomorphism as used here. On the contrary, if the action of an impulse depends on the position of the fibre that carries it, in the whole system of connected fibres, it would seem at once probable that its effects will depend on what other impulses are proceeding at the same time. Although at any given time (or within any given structure) any particular group of impulses occurring at the same time will have the same significance, there is no reason to expect that the effects of a single impulse will be the same whether it appears in company with one group or with another group of other impulses.

2.13. This particular misunderstanding of the idea of a one-to-one correspondence between impulse and sensation has been persistently and successfully criticized by the members of the gestalt school4 under the name of the ‘constancy hypothesis’. Their experimental work has amply confirmed that such an invariable connexion between individual impulse and elementary sensations does not exist.

2.14. Closely connected with this ‘constancy hypothesis’ is the conception of an ‘invariable core of pure sensation’ which is supposed to be in some manner originally attached to the nervous impulse and to continue to exist independently of all the modifications of, and additions to, this basic quality which may be effected by experience or acquired relations. Bertrand Russell, e.g., explicitly states with reference to this that ‘the essence of sensation . . . is its independence of past experience.’5

2.15. It has, of course, long been a common place in psychology that a large part of the experienced content of the sensory qualities is the result of interpretation based on experience. But these relational determinants of sensory qualities have invariably been represented as mere modifications of, or additions to, an original core of pure sensation.6 It will be the central thesis of the theory to be outlined that it is not merely a part but the whole of sensory qualities which is in this sense an ‘interpretation’ based on the experience of the individual or the race. The conception of an original pure core of sensation which is merely modified by experience is an entirely unnecessary fiction, and the same processes which are known to modify and alter the qualitative attributes of sensations can also account for the initial differentiation.

2.16. With this contention we do not mean to assert that the ‘learning’ process which can account for the determination of the order of sensory qualities takes place entirely or predominantly in the course of the development of the individual. In this sense our contention does not take side in the dispute between the ‘nativists’ and the ‘empiricists’. But this dispute seems usually to involve also the distinct question whether the order of sensory qualities can be understood as having been formed by the combined experience of the race and the individual, or whether it must be regarded as something unaccountably and unexplainably existing apart from the effects which the environment exercises on the development of the organism. In this second sense our thesis belongs to the ‘empipiricist’ position (see 5.15).

2.17. It might indeed be said that the whole theory of the formation of sensory qualities to be developed in the following pages is no more than an extension and systematic development of the widely held view that every sensation contains elements of interpretation based on learning, an extension by which the whole of the sensory qualities is accounted for as such an interpretation. It will be contended that in the course of its phylogenetic and onto-genetic development the organism learns to build up a system of differentiations between stimuli in which each stimulus is given a definite place in an order, a place which represents the significance which the occurrence of that stimulus in different combinations with other stimuli has for the organism. We shall see later in what sense and to what extent this ‘classification’ (as we shall call it) of the stimuli by the organism can be said to ‘reproduce’ the ‘objective’ relations between those stimuli in the physical world.

2.18. It should, however, at once be noted, although a fuller discussion of this must be postponed to a later point,7 that when we claim to provide an ‘explanation’ this will never mean more than an ‘explanation of the principle’ by which phenomena of the kind in question can be produced. By such an ‘explanation of the principle’ we shall provisionally understand an explanation which not only confines itself to showing ‘that such and such actions lie within the range of known physical actions, or that known physical phenomena produce effects similar to them’,8 but also that, though we may be able to explain the general character of the processes at work, their operation may be so complicated in detail as to place their full description forever beyond the power of the human mind.

2.19. The reason for confining ourselves to such an ‘explanation of the principle’ is, therefore, not only that in the present state of psychology and neurophysiology the main need seems to be for a hypothesis suggesting a possible way in which the phenomena in question may be produced, but also that there appear to exist reasons which should make for man a full explanation of his own processes of thought absolutely impossible, because this conception involves, as we hope to show, a contradiction.





