1. PRE-SENSORY EXPERIENCE AND PURE EMPIRICISM


8.1. If the account of the determination of mental qualities which we have given is correct, it would mean that the apparatus by means of which we learn about the external world is itself the product of a kind of experience (5.1–5.16). It is shaped by the conditions prevailing in the environment in which we live, and it represents a kind of generic reproduction of the relations between the elements of this environment which we have experienced in the past; and we interpret any new event in the environment in the light of that experience. If this conclusion is true, it raises necessarily certain important philosophical questions on which in this last chapter we shall attempt some tentative observations.

8.2. These consequences arise mainly from the rôle which we have assigned to the action of the pre-sensory experience or ‘linkages’ in determining the sensory qualities. Especially the elimination of the hypothetical ‘pure’ or ‘primary’ core of sensations, supposed not to be due to earlier experience, but either to involve some direct communication of properties of the external objects, or to constitute irreducible mental atoms or elements, disposes of various philosophical puzzles which arise from the lack of meaning of those hypotheses.

8.3. According to the traditional view, experience begins with the reception of sensory data possessing constant qualities which either reflect corresponding attributes belonging to the perceived external objects, or are uniquely correlated with such attributes of the elements of the physical world. These sensory data are supposed to form the raw material which the mind accumulates and learns to arrange in various manners. The theory developed here challenges the basic distinction implied in that conception: the distinction between sensory perception of given qualities and the operations which the intellect is supposed to perform on these data in order to arrive at an understanding of the given phenomenal world (5.19, 6.44).

8.4. According to our theory, the characteristic attributes of the sensory qualities, or the classes into which different events are placed in the process of perception, are not attributes which are possessed by these events and which are in some manner ‘communicated’ to the mind; they are regarded as consisting entirely in the ‘differentiating’ responses of the organism by which the qualitative classification or order of these events is created; and it is contended that this classification is based on the connexions created in the nervous system by past linkages. Every sensation, even the ‘purest’, must therefore be regarded as an interpretation of an event in the light of the past experience of the individual or the species.

8.5. The process of experience thus does not begin with sensations or perceptions, but necessarily precedes them: it operates on physiological events and arranges them into a structure or order which becomes the basis of their ‘mental’ significance; and the distinction between the sensory qualities, in terms of which alone the conscious mind can learn about anything in the external world, is the result of such pre-sensory experience. We may express this also by stating that experience is not a function of mind or consciousness, but that mind and consciousness are rather products of experience (2.50).

8.6. Every sensory experience of an event in the external world is therefore likely to possess ‘attributes’ (or to be in a manner distinguished from other sensory events) to which no similar attributes of the external events correspond. These ‘attributes’ are the significance which the organism has learnt to assign to a class of events on the basis of the past associations of events of this class with certain other classes of events. It is only in so far as the nervous system has learnt thus to treat a particular stimulus as a member of a certain class of events, determined by the connexions which all the corresponding impulses possess with the same impulses representing other classes of events, that an event can be perceived at all, i.e., that it can obtain a distinct position in the system of sensory qualities.

8.7. If the distinctions between the different sensory qualities of which our conscious experience appears to be built up are thus themselves determined by pre-sensory experiences (linkages), the whole problem of the relation between experience and knowledge assumes a new complexion. So far as experience in the narrow sense, i.e., conscious sensory experience, is meant, it is then clearly not true that all that we know is due to such experience. Experience of this kind would rather become possible only after experience in the wider sense of linkages has created the order of sensory qualities—the order which determines the qualities of the constituents of conscious experience.

8.8. Sense experience therefore presupposes the existence of a sort of accumulated ‘knowledge’, of an acquired order of the sensory impulses based on their past co-occurrence; and this knowledge, although based on (pre-sensory) experience, can never be contradicted by sense experiences and will determine the forms of such experiences which are possible.

8.9. John Locke’s famous fundamental maxim of empiricism that nihil est in intellectu quod non antea fuerit in sen su is therefore not correct if meant to refer to conscious sense experience. And it does not justify the conclusion that all we know (quod est in intellectu) must be subject to confirmation or contradiction by sense experience. From our explanation of the formation of the order of sensory qualities itself it would follow that there will exist certain general principles to which all sensory experiences must conform (such as that two distinct colours cannot be in the same place)—relations between the parts of such experiences which must always be true.

8.10. A certain part at least of what we know at any moment about the external world is therefore not learnt by sensory experience, but is rather implicit in the means through which we can obtain such experience; it is determined by the order of the apparatus of classification which has been built up by pre-sensory linkages. What we experience consciously as qualitative attributes of the external events is determined by relations of which we are not consciously aware but which are implicit in these qualitative distinctions, in the sense that they affect all that we do in response to these experiences.

8.11. All that we can perceive is thus determined by the order of sensory qualities which provides the ‘categories’ in terms of which sense experience can alone take place. Conscious experience, in particular, always refers to events defined in terms of relations to other events which do not occur in that particular experience.1

8.12. We thus possess ‘knowledge’ about the phenomenal world which, because it is in this manner implicit in all sensory experience, must be true of all that we can experience through our senses. This does not mean, however, that this knowledge must also be true of the physical world, that is, of the order of the stimuli which cause our sensations. While the conditions which make sense perception possible—the apparatus of classification which treats them as similar or different—must affect all sense perception, it does not for this reason also govern the order of the events in the physical world.

8.13. It requires a deliberate effort to divest oneself of the habitual assumption that all we have learned from experience must be true of the external (physical) world.2 But since all we can ever learn from experience are generalizations about certain kinds of events, and since no number of particular instances can ever prove such a generalization, knowledge based entirely on experience may yet be entirely false. If the significance which a certain group of stimuli has acquired for us is based entirely on the fact that in the past they have regularly occurred in combination with certain other stimuli, this may or may not be an adequate basis for a classification which will enable us to make true predictions. We have earlier (5.20–5.24) given a number of reasons why we must expect that the classifications of events in the external world which our senses perform will not strictly correspond to a classification of these events based solely on the similarity or the differences of their behaviour towards each other.

8.14. While there can thus be nothing in our mind which is not the result of past linkages (even though, perhaps, acquired not by the individual but by the species), the experience that the classification based on the past linkages does not always work, i.e., does not always lead to valid predictions, forces us to revise that classification (6.45–6.48). In the course of this process of reclassification we not only establish new relations between the data given within a fixed framework of reference, i.e., between the elements of given classes: but since the framework consists of the relations determining the classes, we are led to adjust that framework itself.

8.15. The reclassification, or breaking up of the classes formed by the implicit relations which manifest themselves in our discrimination of sensory qualities, and the replacement of these classes by new classes defined by explicit relations, will occur whenever the expectations resulting from the existing classification are disappointed, or when beliefs so far held are disproved by new experiences. The immediate effects of such conflicting experiences will be to introduce inconsistent elements into the model of the external world; and such inconsistencies can be eliminated only if what formerly were treated as elements of the same class are now treated as elements of different classes (5.72).

8.16. The reclassification which is thus performed by the mind is a process similar to that through which we pass in learning to read aloud a language which is not spelled phonetically. We learn to give identical symbols different values according as they appear in combination with different other symbols, and to recognize different groups of symbols as being equivalent without even noticing the individual symbols.

8.17. While the process of reclassification involves a change of the frame of reference, or of what is a priori true of all statements which can be made about the objects defined with respect to that frame of reference, it alters merely the particular presuppositions of all statements, but does not change the fact that such presuppositions must be implied in all statements that can be made. In fact, far from being diminished, the a priori element will tend to increase as in the course of this process the various objects are increasingly defined by explicit relations existing between them.

8.18. The new experiences which are the occasion of, and which enter into, the new classifications or definitions of objects, is necessarily presupposed by anything which we can learn about these objects and cannot be contradicted by anything which we can say about the objects thus defined. There is, therefore, on every level, or in every universe of discourse, a part of our knowledge which, although it is the result of experience, cannot be controlled by experience, because it constitutes the ordering principle of that universe by which we distinguish the different kinds of objects of which it consists and to which our statements refer.

8.19. The more this process leads us away from the immediately given sensory qualities, and the more the elements described in terms of these qualities are replaced by new elements defined in terms of consciously experienced relations, the greater becomes the part of our knowledge which is embodied in the definitions of the elements, and which therefore is necessarily true. At the same time the part of our knowledge which is subject to control by experiences becomes correspondingly smaller.

8.20. This progressive growth of the tautological character of our knowledge is a necessary consequence of our endeavour so to readjust our classification of the elements as to make statements about them true. We have no choice but either to accept the classification effected by our senses, and in consequence to be unable correctly to predict the behaviour of the objects thus defined; or to redefine the objects on the basis of the observed differences in their behaviour with respect to each other, with the result that not only the differences which are the basis of our classification become necessarily true of the objects thus classified, but also that it becomes less and less possible to say of any particular sensory object with any degree of certainty to which of our theoretical classes it belongs.

8.21. This difficulty does not become too serious so long as we merely redefine a particular object in relational terms. But as we continue this process of reclassification, those other objects must in turn also be redefined in a similar manner. In the course of this process we are soon forced to take into account not only relations existing between a given object and other objects which are actually observed in conjunction with the former, but also relations which have existed in the past between that and other objects, and even relations which can be described only in hypothetical terms: relations which might have been observed between this and other objects in circumstances which did not in fact exist and which, if they had existed, would not have left the identity of the object unchanged.

8.22. Several chemical substances may, e.g., be completely indistinguishable to the senses so long as they remain in their given state. The reason why chemistry classifies them as different substances is that in certain circumstances and in combination with certain other substances they will ‘react’ differently. But most of these chemical reactions involve a change in the character of the substance, so that the identical quantity of a given substance, which has been tested for the reaction which is the basis of its classification, cannot be available after it has been established to which class it belongs. Only by such unverifiable assumptions as that the quantity of the substance from which we have drawn the sample is completely homogeneous, so that what we have found out about various samples applies also to the rest, can we arrive at the conclusion that the particular sensory object belongs to a definite theoretical class.

8.23. The sense data, or the sensory qualities of the objects about which we make statements, thus are pushed steadily further back; and when we complete the process of defining all objects by explicit relations instead of by the implicit relations inherent in our sensory distinctions, those sense data disappear completely from the system. In the end the system of explicit definitions becomes both all-comprehensive and self-contained or circular; all the elements in the universe are defined by their relations to each other, and all we know about that universe becomes contained in those definitions. We should obtain a self-contained model capable of reproducing all the combinations of events which we can observe in the external world, but should have no way of ascertaining whether any particular event in the external world corresponded to a particular part of our model.

8.24. Science thus tends necessarily towards an ultimate state in which all knowledge is embodied in the definitions of the objects with which it is concerned; and in which all true statements about these objects therefore are analytical or tautological and could not be disproved by any experience. The observation that any object did not behave as it should could then only mean that it was not an object of the kind it was thought to be. With the disappearance of all sensory data from the system, laws (or theories) would no longer exist in it apart from the definitions of the objects to which they applied, and for that reason could never be disproved.

8.25. Such a completely tautological or self-contained system of knowledge about the world would not be useless. It would constitute a model of the world from which we could read off what kind of events are possible in that world and what kind are not. It would often allow us, on the basis of a fairly complete history of a particular sensory object, to state with a high degree of probability that it fits into one and only one possible place in our model, and that in consequence it is likely to behave in a certain manner in circumstances which would have to be similarly described. But it would never enable us to identify with certainty a particular sensory object with a particular part of our model, or with certainty to predict how the former will behave in given circumstances.

8.26. A strict identification of any point of our theoretical model of the world with a particular occurrence in the sensory world would be possible only if we were in a position to complete our model of the physical world by including in it a complete model of the working of our brain (cf. 5.77–5.91)—that is, if we were able to explain in detail the manner in which our senses classify the stimuli. This, however, as will be shown in section 6 of this chapter, is a task which that same brain can never accomplish.

8.27. In conclusion of this section it should, perhaps, be emphasized that, in so far as we have been led into opposition to some of the theses traditionally associated with empiricism, we have been led to their rejection not from an opposite point of view, but on the contrary, by a more consistent and radical application of its basic idea. Precisely because all our knowledge, including the initial order of our different sensory experiences of the world, is due to experience, it must contain elements which cannot be contradicted by experience. It must always refer to classes of elements which are defined by certain relations to other elements, and it is valid only on the assumption that these relations actually exist. Generalization based on experience must refer to classes of objects or events and can have relevance to the world only in so far as these classes are regarded as given irrespective of the statement itself. Sensory experience presupposes, therefore, an order of experienced objects which precedes that experience and which cannot be contradicted by it, though it is itself due to other, earlier experience.





