7. BIOGENIC NEEDS AND DRIVES


4.56. We still have not yet noticed the prime sources of activity of the organism, namely those changes in its constitution or balance which occur periodically as a result of its normal vegetative processes and which make action by the organism necessary if it is to survive. In consequence of our stress on the sensory organization we have so far treated the whole problem as if it were mainly one of adaptation of the organism to changes originating in the environment. But even more important than the question why the organism will behave differently in different environments is the question why it will at different times behave differently in the same environment.

4.57. Even more than before our discussion must here presuppose a great deal which belongs to theoretical biology and physiology. As has already been pointed out (4.13), there is really no other difference between the problem of the purposive internal functioning of the organism and that of its purposive behaviour towards its environment, than that the latter raises the problem of a comprehensive order of the various external stimuli which determines how in different combinations they will modify each other’s effects. This includes the problem of why internal stimuli may bring it about that a given organism will at different times respond differently to the same set of external stimuli.

4.58. What is significant here for our purposes is not so much the precise nature of the physiological processes which determine such states as hunger, thirst, and the like, but what the ‘attitudes’, ‘dispositions’, or ‘sets’ corresponding to these physiological states mean for the responses of the organism towards its environment. Since these various ‘needs’ or ‘drives’ may be produced by visceral, glandular or general metabolic processes, it is convenient to refer to them by the generic term ‘biogenic needs’.11

4.59. It may be mentioned at once that these ‘needs’ resulting from the spontaneous vegetative processes of the body are, of course, closely related to, and sometimes practically indistinguishable from, another kind of attitudes or sets such as fear or rage, which, though usually caused by some sensory perception, also consist of a disposition for a certain range or type of actions. The problems which these ‘emotions’ or ‘feelings’ raise are thus very similar to those raised by the needs in the narrower sense. It would be difficult to decide whether the sexual urge provoked by a sensory impression is in this sense a ‘need’ or an ‘emotion’. Similarly, appetite may be stimulated by the smell of some delectable food without hunger being present, or a sense of fear caused by bodily processes without any sensory (i.e., exteroceptive) experience inspiring the fear.

4.60. While we shall in the first instance consider the significance of needs and wants proper, and leave to the next sections any more specific comments on emotions, most of what is to be said about needs applies equally to emotions. Both involve not only a disposition of the organism towards a certain class of actions, but also a special receptivity for certain classes of stimuli. As a result of a peculiar state of balance the whole organism comes to ‘like’ or ‘dislike’ particular kinds of stimuli. We shall later in connexion with ‘attention’, (6.26–6.27) have to consider more fully the nature of this state of excitatory preparedness.

4.61. It is perhaps useful to distinguish between the term ‘set’12 as the name for the preparedness of the organism for certain kinds of actions, and the term ‘expectancy’ for the increased receptivity for certain kinds of stimuli which will elicit the corresponding responses. But such a distinction between the sensory and the motor aspect of what is essentially a relation between a class of stimuli and a class of responses must not lead us to treat them as if they were really separate. The important point is their close connexion, the fact that the organism will be disposed to respond in a particular manner to any one of a class of stimuli.

4.62. At this stage of the exposition it is yet too early to try to show even in outline how such a state of need, which at first may produce merely an aimless increase of motor activity, may become directed towards the purposive search for certain kinds of stimuli, so that the animal searches for food or for a sex partner, which, when found, will produce the consuming activity. This will have to be attempted in the next chapter.

4.63. Our present purpose was merely to show that in addition to the ‘objective’ significance which the different stimuli will acquire for the organism as the result of their regular association with other stimuli, they will also acquire a special ‘subjective’ or ‘pragmatic’ significance through their capacity of satisfying certain needs. The connexions which will give them this significance will operate not only through certain stimuli producing certain actions if the need is present, but also through the need of making the organism search for stimuli of the appropriate kind. This evaluation of stimuli with respect to goals which are determined by the momentary needs will have to be considered further when we examine the general problem of how a representation of the environment enables the organism to act ‘purposively’ (5.64 ff.).





