5. EXPLANATION OF THE PRINCIPLE


8.57. It follows from what has been said so far about explanation that it will always refer to classes of events, and that it will account only for those properties which are common to the elements of the class. Explanation is always generic in the sense that it always refers to features which are common to all phenomena of a certain kind, and it can never explain everything to be observed on a particular set of events.

8.58. But although all explanation must refer to the common features of a class of phenomena, there are evidently different degrees to which an explanation can be general, or to which it may approach to a full explanation of a particular set of events. The model may reproduce only the few common features of a great variety of phenomena, or it may reproduce a much larger number of features common to a smaller number of instances. In general, it will be true that the simpler the model, the wider will be the range of particular phenomena of which it reproduces one aspect, and the more complex the model, the more will its range of application be restricted.11 In this respect the relation of the model to the object is similar to that between the connotation and the denotation (or the ‘intension’ and the ‘extension’) of a concept.

8.59. Most explanations (or theories) with which we are familiar are intended to show a common principle which operates in a large number of particular instances which in other respects may differ widely from each other. We have referred already earlier (2.18–2.19) to such explanations as ‘explanations of the principle’.12 The difference between such ‘explanations of the principle’ and more detailed explanations is, of course, merely one of the degree of their generality, and strictly speaking no explanation can be more than an explanation of the principle. It will be convenient, however, to reserve the name ‘explanation of the principle’ for explanations of a high degree of generality, and to contrast them with explanations of the detail.

8.60. The usual kind of explanation which we give, e.g., of the functioning of a clockwork, will in our sense be merely an explanation of the principle. It will merely show how the kind of phenomena which we call clockworks are produced: the manner in which a pair of hands can be made to revolve at constant speeds, etc. In the same ‘general’ way most of us are familiar with the principles on which a steam engine, an atomic bomb, or certain kinds of simple organisms function, without therefore necessarily being able to give a sufficiently detailed explanation of any one of these objects so that we should be able to construct it or precisely to predict its behaviour. Even where we are able to construct one of these objects, say a clockwork, the knowledge of the principle involved will not be sufficient to predict more than certain general aspects of its operation. We should never be able, for instance, before we have built it, to predict precisely how fast it will move or precisely where its hands will be at a particular moment of time.

8.61. If in general we are not more aware of this distinction between explanations merely of the principle and more detailed explanations, this is because usually there will be no great difficulty about elaborating any explanation of the principle so as to make it approximate to almost any desired degree to the circumstances of a particular situation. By increasing the complexity of the model we can usually obtain a close reproduction of any particular feature in which we are interested.

8.62. The distinction between the explanation of the principle on which a wide class of phenomena operate and the more detailed explanation of particular phenomena is reflected in the familiar distinction between the ‘theoretical’ and the more ‘applied’ parts of the different sciences. ‘Theoretical physics’, ‘theoretical chemistry’ or ‘theoretical biology’ are concerned with the explanation of the principles common to all phenomena which we call physical, chemical or biological.

8.63. Strictly speaking we should, of course, not be entitled to speak at all of phenomena of a certain kind unless we know some common principles which apply to the explanation of the phenomena of that kind. The various ways in which atoms are combined into molecules, e.g., constitute the common principles of all the phenomena which we call chemical. It is quite possible that an observed phenomenon, supposed to be, say, chemical, such as a change in the colour of a certain substance, may on investigation prove to be an event of a different kind, e.g., an optical event, such as a change in the light falling on the substance.

8.64. While it is true that a theoretical class of phenomena can be definitely established only after we have found a common principle of explanation applying to all its members, that is, a model of high degree of generality reproducing the features they all have in common, we will yet often know of a range of phenomena which seem to be similar in some respect and where we therefore expect to find a common principle of explanation without, however, as yet knowing such a principle. The difference between such prima facie or ‘empirical’ classes of phenomena, and the theoretical classes derived from a common principle of explanation, is that the empirical class is limited to phenomena actually observed, while the theoretical class enables us to define the range over which phenomena of the kind in question may vary.

8.65. The class of events which we call ‘mental’ has so far on the whole been an empirical class in this sense. What has been attempted here might be described as a sketch of a ‘theoretical psychology’ in the same sense in which we speak of theoretical physics or theoretical biology. We have attempted an explanation of the principle by which we may account for the peculiarities which are common to all processes which are commonly called mental. The question which arises now is how far in the sphere of mental processes we can hope to develop the explanation of the principle into more detailed explanations, especially into explanations that would enable us to predict the course of particular mental events.





