4. MULTIPLE CLASSIFICATION


2.39. In the kind of simple classification which we have just considered, any one of the individual recurrent events is always grouped with the same group of other events and with them only. But the same principle can effect what may be called multiple classification: at any moment a given event may be treated as a member of more than one class, each of these classes containing also different other events; and a given event may also on different occasions be assigned to different classes according to the accompany events with which it occurs. The classification may thus be ‘multiple’ in more than one respect. Not only may each individual event belong to more than one class, but it may also contribute to produce different responses of the machine if and only if it occurs in combination with certain other events. Different groups consisting of different individual events may in this manner evoke the same response and the machine would then classify not only individual events but also groups consisting of a number of (simultaneous or successive) events. In this latter case the groups (or sequences) of individual events would as groups constitute the elements of the different classes.

2.40. The first kind of multiple classification could be performed, for instance, by a machine similar to the first we have imagined if, instead of placing the balls into different receptacles, it were to show different signs, say lights of different colours, every time a ball is placed into it. A ball to which the machine responded by showing a red and a green light would then belong to two classes of balls, that of all balls evoking a red light and that of all balls evoking a green light. Or, in the case of the second kind of machine described before, which performs the classification by establishing connexions with different bells, each incoming signal might be passed on to more than one bell and belong accordingly to a corresponding number of different classes.

2.41. The second type of multiple classification would be represented by a machine whose responses depended not only on the individual events to be classified but also on the combinations in which they occurred. The classification of the groups of events by such a machine might be either additional to the classification of the individual events, or occur in the place of it, so that the individual event which, if it occurred in isolation, evoked say a green light, would not do so but contribute to produce a blue light if it occurred at the same time with, or within a short interval of certain other events.

2.42. We shall later (3.52–3.57) have to consider yet a third type of multiple classification: namely one in which successive acts of classification follow upon each other in relays, or on different ‘levels’; in this type the distinct responses which effect the grouping at a first level become in turn subject to a further classification (which also may be multiple in both the former senses). This is probably the most important characteristic of the particular kind of classificatory mechanism which the nervous system represents; but while we are merely concerned to bring out certain general principles, we shall disregard this aspect until the next chapter.

2.43. In the system of classification in which we shall be interested the different individual events will be the recurrent impulses arriving through afferent fibres at the various centres of the nervous system. For the purposes of this discussion we shall have to assume that these individual impulses possess no significant individual properties which distinguish them from one another. They must be regarded initially as what the logician describes as an ‘uninterpreted set of marks’. Our task will be to show how the kind of mechanism which the central nervous system provides may arrange this set of undifferentiated events in an order which possesses the same formal structure as the order of sensory qualities.16

2.44. Throughout the discussion of that neural apparatus of classification it will be important to keep in mind the distinction between the structural and the functional (or the static and the dynamic) aspect of that mechanism (2.20–2.31). The elements of the (anatomical) structure will be the different fibres; the element of the (physiological) process will be the impulses conducted by these fibres. It will be the impulses which (as individuals or groups) will be the object of the classificatory process.

2.45. Our task will thus be to show how these undifferentiated individual impulses or groups of impulses may obtain such a position in a system of relations to each other that in their functional significance they will resemble one another or differ from another in a manner which corresponds strictly to the relations between the sensory qualities which are evoked by them.





