3. THE PRINCIPLE OF CLASSIFICATION


2.32. The phenomena with which we are here concerned are commonly discussed in psychology under the heading of ‘discrimination’. This term is somewhat misleading because it suggests a sort of ‘recognition’ of physical differences between the events which it discriminates, while we are concerned with a process which creates the distinctions in question. The same is true of most of the other available words which might be used, such as ‘to sort out’, ‘to differentiate’, or ‘to classify’. The only appropriate term which is tolerably free from misleading connotations would appear to be ‘grouping’.14

2.33. For the purposes of the following discussion it will nevertheless be convenient to adopt the term ‘to classify’ with its corresponding nouns ‘classes’ and ‘classification’ in a special technical meaning. The next few paragraphs will serve solely to make precise the exact meaning in which we propose to use this term. We shall at first consider extremely simple processes of classification which will have little resemblance to the more complex kinds which are relevant to our main task. Our present purpose will be more to make clear what the principle of classification as such involves, than to show how it operates in the nervous system.

2.34. By ‘classification’ we shall mean a process in which on each occasion on which a certain recurring event happens it produces the same specific effect, and where the effects produced by any one kind of such events may be either the same or different from those which any other kind of event produces in a similar manner. All the different events which whenever they occur produce the same effect will be said to be events of the same class, and the fact that every one of them produces the same effect will be the sole criterion which makes them members of the same class.

2.35. We may conceive of a machine constructed for the purpose of performing simple processes of classification of this kind. We can, for instance, imagine a machine which ‘sorts out’ balls of various size which are placed into it by distributing them between different receptacles. We will assume that no two balls have the same size so that size is merely a means of identifying the individual balls. Indeed we shall even assume that no two balls have any property in common which they do not share with every other ball in the set, so that there are not ‘objective’ similarities peculiar to the different members of any subgroup or class of these balls; any grouping of different balls by the machine which places them into the same receptacle will create a class which is based exclusively on the action of the machine and not on any similarity which those balls possess apart from the action of the machine.15

2.36. We may find, for instance, that the machine will always place the balls with a diameter of 16, 18, 28, 31, 32, and 40 mm in a receptacle marked A, the balls with a diameter of 17, 22, 30, and 35 in a receptacle marked B, and so forth. The balls placed by the machine into the same receptacle will then be said to belong to the same class, and the balls placed by it into different receptacles to belong to so many different classes. The fact that a ball is placed by the machine into a particular receptacle thus forms the sole criterion for assigning it to a particular class.

2.37. Another kind of machine performing this simplest kind of classification might be conceived as in a similar fashion sorting out individual signals arriving through any one of a large number of wires or tubes. We shall regard here any signal arriving through one particular wire or tube as the same recurring event which will always lead to the same action of the machine. The machine would respond similarly also to signals arriving through some different tubes or wires, and any such group to which the machine responded in the same manner would be regarded as events of the same class. Such a machine would act like a simplified telephone exchange in which each of a number of incoming wires was permanently connected with, say a particular bell, so that any signal coming in on any one of these wires would ring that bell. All the wires connected with any one bell would then carry signals belonging to the same class.

2.38. An actual instance of a machine of this kind is provided by certain statistical machines for sorting cards on which punched holes represent statistical data. If we regard the appearance of any card with the same data punched on it as the recurrence of the same event, and assume that the machine is so arranged that various groups of different data are placed into the same receptacle, we should have a machine which performs a classification in the sense in which we use this term.





