The Sensory Order An Inquiry into the Foundations of Theoretical Psychology (F. A. Hayek) 









The University of Chicago Press, Chicago 60637

The University of Chicago Press, Ltd., London

Copyright in the International Copyright Union

All rights reserved. Originally published 1952

Paperback edition 1976

Printed in the United States of America

04 03 02 01 00 99 6 5 4 3

ISBN: 0-226-32094-4 (paperback)

ISBN-13: 978-0-226-32130-1 (e-book)

The paper used in this publication meets the minimum requirements of the American National Standard for Information Sciences—Permanence of Paper for Printed Library Materials, ANSI Z39.48-1992.





THE SENSORY ORDER


An Inquiry into the Foundations

of Theoretical Psychology

By

F. A. HAYEK

With an Introduction by

HEINRICH KLÜVER





THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS

CHICAGO • ILLINOIS





PREFACE

A GREAT deal of explanation would be necessary were I to try and justify why an economist ventures to rush in where psychologists fear to tread. But this excursion into psychology has little connexion with whatever competence I may possess in another field. It is the outcome of an idea which suggested itself to me as a very young man when I was still uncertain whether to become an economist or a psychologist. But though my work has led me away from psychology, the basic idea then conceived has continued to occupy me; its outlines have gradually developed, and it has often proved helpful in dealing with the problems of the methods of the social sciences. In the end it was concern with the logical character of social theory which forced me to re-examine systematically my ideas on theoretical psychology.

The paper in which as a student more than thirty years ago I first tried to sketch these ideas, and which lies before me as I write, I was certainly wise not to attempt to publish at the time, even though it contains the whole principle of the theory I am now putting forward. My difficulty then was, as I had been aware even at the time, that though I felt that I had found the answer to an important problem, I could not explain precisely what the problem was. The few years for which I then thought to put the draft away have become a much longer period; and it is little likely that the time will still come when I can devote myself wholly to the working out of these ideas. Yet, rightly or wrongly, I feel that during those years I have learnt at least to state the nature of the problem I had been trying to answer. And as the solution at which I then arrived seems to me to be still new and worth consideration, I have now attempted this fuller exposition of what I had clumsily tried to say in my youthful effort.

The origins of this book, therefore, trace back to an approach to the problem that was current a full generation ago. The psychology which, without much guidance, I read in Vienna in 1919 and 1920, and which led me to my problem, was indeed in all essentials still the psychology of before 1914. Most of the movements which in the interval have determined the direction of psychological research were then either unknown to me or still altogether unheard of: behaviourism (except for the work done in Russia by Pavlov and Bechterev), the gestalt school, or the physiological work of such men as Sherrington or Lashley. And although discussions in Vienna at that time was, of course, full of psychoanalysis, I have to admit that I have never been able to derive much profit from that school. The main authors from which I derived my knowledge were still H. von Helmholtz and W. Wundt, W. James and G. E. Müller, and particularly Ernst Mach. I still vividly remember how in reading Mach, in an experience very similar to that which Mach himself describes with reference to Kant’s concept of the Ding an sich, I suddenly realized how a consistent development of Mach’s analysis of perceptual organization made his own concept of sensory elements superfluous and otiose, an idle construction in conflict with most of his acute psychological analysis.

It was with considerable surprise that, thirty years later, in examining the literature of modern psychology I found that the particular problem with which I had been concerned had remained pretty much in the same state in which it had been when it first occupied me. It seems, if this is not too presumptuous for an outsider to suggest, as if this neglect of one of the basic problems of psychology were the result of the prevalence during this period of an all too exclusively empirical approach and of an excessive contempt for ‘speculation’. It seems almost as if ‘speculation’ (which, be it remembered, is merely another word for thinking) had become so discredited among psychologists that it has to be done by outsiders who have no professional reputation to lose. But the fear of following out complex processes of thought, far from having made discussion more precise, appears to have created a situation in which all sorts of obscure concepts, such as ‘representative processes’, ‘perceptual organization’, or ‘organized field’, are used as if they described definite facts, while actually they stand for somewhat vague theories whose exact content requires to be made clear. Nor has the concentration on those facts which were most readily accessible to observation always meant that attention was directed to what is most important. Neither the earlier exclusive emphasis on peripheral responses, nor the more recent concentration on macroscopic or mass processes accessible to anatomical or electrical analysis, have been entirely beneficial to the understanding of the fundamental problems.

Since this book is concerned with some of the most general problems of psychology, I fear that to many contemporary psychologists it will appear to deal more with philosophical than with psychological problems; but I should be sorry if they should regard it for that reason as falling outside their province. It is true that it presents no new facts; but neither does it employ any hypotheses which are not common property of current psychological discussion. Its aim is to work out certain implications of generally accepted facts or assumptions in order to use them as an explanation of the central problem of the nature of mental phenomena. Indeed, if the views generally held on the subject are approximately true, it would seem as if something of the kind here described must happen, and the surprising fact would seem that so little attempt has been made to work out systematically these consequences of existing knowledge. Perhaps such an effort of effectively thinking through these implications requires a combination of qualifications which nobody possesses to a sufficient degree and which the specialist who feels sure in his own field therefore hesitates to undertake. To do it adequately one would indeed have to be equally competent as a psychologist and as a physiologist, as a logician and as a mathematician, and as a physicist and as a philosopher. I need scarcely say that I possess none of these qualifications. But since it is doubtful whether anybody does, and since at least nobody who possesses them as yet has tried his hand at this problem, it is perhaps inevitable that the first attempt should be made by somebody who had to try and acquire the necessary equipment as he went along. A satisfactory execution of the thesis which I have outlined would probably require the collaboration of several specialists in the different fields.

The parts of the problem on which I feel tolerably confident that I have something of importance to say are the statement of the problem, the general principles of its solution, and some of the consequences which follow from the latter for epistemology and the methodology of the sciences. The sections of the book with which I am therefore tolerably satisfied are the beginning and the end: Chapters I and II and Chapters VII and VIII. Perhaps it would have been wiser if I had made no attempt to implement the programme outlined in the earlier chapters, since the central part of the book in which this is attempted is unavoidably both more technical and more amateurish than the rest. Yet it seemed important to illustrate the general principles stated in the earlier chapters by some attempt at elaboration, even at the risk of slipping at particular points. In some ways this would not greatly matter: I am much more concerned about what would constitute an explanation of mental phenomena, than whether the details of this theory are entirely correct. Since we are still in a position where we are not certain what would constitute an explanation, any theory which, if it were correct, would provide one would be a gain, even if it should not be tenable in all respects.

Even the present version of this book has occupied me for several years, and though I have endeavoured to acquaint myself with the relevant literature, I am not sure that I have been able fully to keep up with current developments. It seems as if the problems discussed here were coming back into favour and some recent contributions have come to my knowledge too late to make full use of them. This applies particularly to Professor D. O. Hebb’s Organization of Behaviour which appeared when the final version of the present book was practically finished. That work contains a theory of sensation which in many respects is similar to the one expounded here; and in view of the much greater technical competence of its author I doubted for a while whether publication of the present book was still justified. In the end I decided that the very fullness with which Professor Hebb has worked out the physiological detail has prevented him from bringing out as clearly as might be wished the general principles of the theory; and as I am concerned more with the general significance of a theory of that kind than with its detail, the two books, I hope, are complementary rather than covering the same ground.

I owe a debt of deep gratitude to the London School of Economics and the Committee on Social Thought of the University of Chicago for giving me the leisure to devote so much time to problems which lie outside the field where my main duties lie. To my friends Karl R. Popper and L. von Bertalanffy and to Professor J. C. Eccles I am much indebted for reading and commenting upon earlier drafts of this book. And without the acute criticism of the manuscript by my wife the book would contain even more obscurities and so slovenly expressions than it undoubtedly still does.

F. A. HAYEK






INTRODUCTION

by HEINRICH KLÜVER

IT has been said that a philosopher is a man who has a bad conscience whenever he hears the word philosophy. Nowadays psychologists no longer seem to develop feelings of guilt when encountering the word psychology. This state of affairs can certainly not be accounted for by assuming that the whole field of psychology has suddenly acquired the status of a ‘science’. In fact, scientific progress in psychology within the last generation according to some critics has been deplorable. A turn for the better, however, would not necessarily be achieved by eliminating all psychologists. There is no doubt that physiologists, neurologists, psychiatrists, anatomists, sociologists, biologists, and workers in other fields would keep psychology alive in one form or another if psychologists were to disappear from the contemporary scene. Investigators in various non-psychological fields are, in the pursuit of their inquiries, again and again forced to deal with psychological problems and even driven to consider problems of theoretical psychology. For example, about ten years or so ago, Sherrington felt compelled to consider the interrelations of neurophysiological and psychological phenomena and to devote several hundred pages in his Man on His Nature to an examination of problems of the ‘mind’.

Dr Hayek’s book, which represents an analysis of the sensory order in relation to problems of theoretical psychology, raises the question whether the time has not again come for psychologists to develop, at least occasionally, a bad conscience when hearing the word psychology. On the one hand, there seems to have been a decline in the quality and quantity of systematic endeavours in the field of theoretical psychology during the last decades; on the other hand, the multifarious activities of psychologists seem to make it more than ever necessary to find a common point of reference. As long as it is assumed, or as long as the illusion is to be kept alive, that the diverse activities of psychologists involve a common factor referrred to by the word psychology, the general conceptual framework of such a psychology must remain of fundamental interest. There is, of course, no lack of theorizing in modern psychology. It is one thing, however, to develop a theory based on the detailed experimental analysis of a particular problem; it is another thing to examine the conceptual tools of theoretical psychology itself. Even particular theories do not always escape the complexity of matters psychological. When G. E. Müller summarized his fifty years of efforts in the field of colour vision, it took him about 650 pages to present his theory of colour vision and he insisted that any simpler theory could be formulated only at the price of ignoring relevant facts. When it comes to systematic efforts in the field of theoretical psychology, it has become increasingly obvious in recent years that psychologists find their particular tasks (ranging from an analysis of ocular to an analysis of political movements and from investigations of the sexual behaviour of male army ants to that of human females) so all-absorbing, time-consuming and exacting that they rarely seem to do anything but increase the number of hastily conceived and irresponsible theories. In fact, nowadays, only a man like Dr Hayek who is sufficiently removed from the noisy market places of present-day psychology appears to have the necessary detachment and peace of mind for a systematic inquiry into the foundations of theoretical psychology.

It is fortunate indeed that Dr Hayek has chosen the sensory order as a basis for discussing problems of theoretical psychology. More than a century ago, in 1824, Flourens insisted that une anatomie sans physiologie serait une anatomie sans but. There is no doubt that an ‘anatomy without physiology’ as well as a ‘physiology without anatomy’ are still with us. Even at the present time, it is not difficult to find books on the ‘physiology’ of the nervous system which are in effect nothing but books on ‘anatomy’ containing elaborate physiological footnotes. The relations between physiology and anatomy acquire particular significance and complexity when it comes to the field of sensory physiology. If not the last, at least the last monumental attempt to cope with problems of the sensory order is to be found in J. von Kries’s General Sensory Physiology published in 1923. It was von Kries who explicitly stated what has been recognized by practically all investigators in this field, namely, that sensory physiology is different from all other fields of physiology and, in fact, from all other natural sciences in that its problems are intimately related to, if not identical with, certain problems of psychology, epistemology, and logic. In fact, sensory physiology and sensory psychology are to a great extent indistinguishable. The psychologist will remember that the duplicity theory of vision formulated by von Kries has stood the test of time longer than is generally the case with scientific theories and that Selig Hecht, only a few years ago, when performing energy measurements to determine the minimum energy necessary for vision, found values of the same order of magnitude as were found by von Kries more than forty years ago although von Kries did not even make energy measurements. Since Hecht considered it ‘astonishing to see the admirable way’ in which von Kries accomplished this task, he felt called upon to pay tribute to von Kries’s skill and care in the evaluation of absorptions, reflections, lens factors, and the like, which are necessary in determining the minimum energy. It cannot be said, therefore, that the man who insisted that problems of sensory physiology cannot be adequately treated without recourse to psychology, epistemology, and logic did not have the necessary ‘hard-boiled’ attitude in scientific matters; the converse is obviously true. Just why the sustained and disciplined thinking of a ‘hard-boiled’ professor of physiology in matters of sensory physiology should be dismissed as ‘mere’ philosophy by psychologists is a problem which clearly requires an analysis by a competent historian unless one assumes that the inability of most psychologists to handle logical and epistemological tools explains such a phenomenon. Such phenomena, unfortunately, have not been rare in the history of psychology. Ziehen, the neuroanatomist, psychiatrist, psychologist, and logician, who wrote a textbook of physiological psychology that went through numerous editions, also wrote an ‘epistemology on psychophysiological and physical basis’ in 1913. It is true that this book has a forbidding title and about 600 pages; but it is probably also true that no psychologist alive ever read all of its pages in the period between World War I and World War II. There is no doubt that a critical examination of the concepts of general sensory physiology in relation to psychology and other fields is a prerequisite for further progress in many physiological and psychological areas of investigation. Dr Hayek, who appears to be far too modest in evaluating his own competence in handling and elucidating sensory physiological and psychological concepts, is, therefore, performing a task urgently needed for further scientific progress.

Problems of the sensory order and the relations between physical and sensory phenomena have been of perennial interest not only to psychologists and physiologists, but also to mathematicians, logicians, and physicists. Recently they have even become of interest to communication engineers. As P. du Bois-Reymond once pointed out, all of us are enclosed ‘in the box of our perceptions’. There have always been some who think that it is possible to escape from this box and there have always been others who think that this is not possible. Ziehen, for instance, was of the opinion that we find everywhere identities, similarities, and differences in examining the ‘given’, i.e., the raw data furnished by experience or, to use his expression, the ‘gignomene’. A fundamental classificatory principle is thus part and parcel of the ‘gignomene’ themselves and constitutes an ultimate ‘unexplainable and indefinable fact’. It is of interest that von Kries, too, believed that the existence of similarities is an ultimate fact neither requiring nor permitting of an explanation. The view, however, that the real content of experience resisting any further analysis is to be found in sensory phenomena has always clashed with the view that the persistence of fixed functional relations between these phenomena constitutes the content of true reality.

In a brief space, it is impossible to outline even the essentials of Dr Hayek’s theory, but from a broad point of view his theory may be said to substantiate Goethe’s famous maxim ‘all that is factual is already theory’ for the field of sensory and other psychological phenomena. According to Dr Hayek, sensory perception must be regarded as an act of classification. What we perceive are never unique properties of individual objects, but always only properties which the objects have in common with other objects. Perception is thus always an interpretation, the placing of something into one or several classes of objects. The characteristic attributes of sensory qualities, or the classes into which different events are placed in the process of perception, are not attributes which are possessed by these events and which are in some manner ‘communicated’ to the mind; they consist entirely in the ‘differentiating’ responses of the organism by which the qualitative classification or order of these events is created; and it is contended that this classification is based on the connexions created in the nervous system by past ‘linkages.’ The qualities which we attribute to the experienced objects are, strictly speaking, not properties of objects at all, but a set of relations by which our nervous system classifies them. To put it differently, all we know about the world is of the nature of theories and all ‘experience’ can do is to change these theories. All sensory perception is necessarily ‘abstract’ in that it always selects certain aspects or features of a given situation. Every sensation, even the ‘purest,’ must therefore be regarded as an interpretation of an event in the light of the past experience of the individual or the species. Experience operates on physiological events and arranges them into a structure or order which becomes the basis of their ‘mental’ significance. In the course of ontogenetic or phylogenetic development, a system of connexions is formed which records the relative frequency with which different groups of internal and external stimuli have acted together on the organism. Each individual impulse or group of impulses on its occurrence evokes other impulses which correspond to stimuli which in the past have usually accompanied its occurrence. The primary impulse through its acquired connexions will set up a bundle of secondary impulses, a ‘following’ of the primary impulse. It is the total or partial identity of this ‘following’ which determines different forms of classification. The essential characteristic of the order of sensory qualities is that, within that order, each stimulus or group of stimuli does not possess a unique significance represented by particular responses, but that the stimuli are given different significance if they occur in combination with, or are evaluated in the light of, an infinite number of other stimuli which may originate from the external world or from the organism itself. A wide range of mental phenomena, such as discrimination, equivalence of stimuli, generalization, transfer, abstraction, and conceptual thought, may all be interpreted as different forms of the same process of classification which is operative in creating the sensory order. The fact that this classification is determined by the position (in a topological, not a spatial, sense) of the individual impulse or group of impulses in a complex structure of connexions, extending through a hierarchy of levels, has important consequences when it comes to considering the effects of physiological or anatomical changes.

These formulations of the author must suffice to characterize at least some aspects of the theory presented in his book. Investigators concerned with an analysis of the logical structure of natural sciences have insisted that the transition from concepts of ‘substance’ to concepts of ‘function’ is characteristic of the historical development of science. ‘Thing-concepts’ have gradually and often painfully yielded to ‘relational concepts’. Even Freud, some critics have insisted, is still a ‘substance’ thinker. In this connexion Dr Hayek’s theory appears very modern indeed since not even traces of ‘thing-concepts’ are left in his theory. ‘Mind’ for him has turned into a complex of relations; it is simply ‘a particular order of a set of events taking place in some organism and in some manner related to, but not identical with, the physical order of events in the environment’. In addition, his theory, perhaps more than any other, emphasizes the far-reaching importance of ‘experience’ and ‘learning’. Certain theories have always stressed the factor of ‘experience’ while others have stressed the importance of the conditions, structures, or presuppositions which make experience possible. The relations between these two sets of factors, however, present peculiar difficulties. In elucidating the complexity of these relations, Dr Hayek probably makes his most important and original contributions. It has been said that there are no permanent or fixed ‘objects’, but only ways of knowing ‘objectively’. The implication of the theory presented here is that even the ways of knowing ‘objectively’ are not stable, or only relatively stable, and that the ordering principles themselves are subject to change. Dr Hayek, therefore, does not take a static view of either the ‘elements’ or the ‘relational’ structure involved in the sensory or any other kind of order. Conceptual thinking, as he rightly emphasizes, has long been recognized as a process of continuous reorganization of the (supposedly constant) elements of the phenomenal world. In his opinion, however, there is no justification for the sharp distinction between the more abstract processes of thought and direct sensory perception since the qualitative elements, of which the phenomenal world is built up, and the whole order of the sensory qualities are themselves subject to continuous change. The fact that there can be nothing in our mind which is not the result of ontogenetically or phylogenetically established ‘linkages’ is not meant to exclude processes of reclassification. At the same time it is to be clearly understood that at least a certain part of what we know at any moment about the external world is not learned by sensory experience, but is rather implicit in the means through which we can obtain such experience; that is, it is determined by the order of the previously established apparatus of classification. To express it differently, there is, on every level, a part of our knowledge which, although it is the result of experience, cannot be controlled by experience because it constitutes the ordering principle. In considering the implications of Dr Hayek’s theory, the impression is gained that not only the characteristics and properties of the organism involved in ‘classifying’ activities but also the characteristics of the ‘environment’ appear in a new light. Man occupies only a small corner of the terrestrial biosphere, including the recently developed, chemically highly active, and man-made anthroposphere of A. P. Pavlov. If pre-sensory and sensory ‘linkages’ are formed not only during the life of the individual, but also in the course of phylogenetic development, the characteristics of the environment, in which the building-up of the apparatus of classification or orientation occurs, assume special importance. If the apparatus of classification is shaped by the conditions in the environment in which we live and if it represents a kind of map or reproduction of relations between elements of this environment, the question arises as to the extent to which environmental factors ‘colour’ or ‘condition’ principles of ordering. Perhaps Vernadsky’s bio-geochemistry has, in the light of Dr Hayek’s theory, unexpected psychological implications. In the meantime, the striking results on ‘conditioned sensations’ recently obtained by Ivo Kohler have demonstrated how strongly environmental factors and conditions may influence sensory phenomena during the life of an individual.

It is not possible to comment in detail on the skill and knowledge with which Dr Hayek has utilized psychological, physiological, and other data to support his thesis and to enumerate the many problems and theories upon which his penetrating analysis has significant bearing. His concepts of the ‘map’, the ‘model’, and related concepts appear to be promising tools in analysing brain mechanisms and behaviour. What is perhaps most pertinent is that his theory suggests definite lines of experimentation. For instance, it should be possible not only to change sensory qualities experimentally, but to create altogether new sensory qualities which have never been experienced before. The psychologist is likely to find this theory helpful in devizing new experiments even beyond the scope indicated by the author himself. In considering the consequences and implications of his own theory and in trying to define its content as unambiguously as possible, the author does not hesitate to point out that an experimental confirmation of theories, such as Semon’s ‘engram’ theory or Paul Weiss’s ‘resonance’ theory, would disprove his own theory.

A great historian once expressed the view that ‘no man, and no product of all a man’s labour either, is like a perfectly thought-out book, and merely to point out lacunae in some pages and deficiences in others must seem much more an envious job of rival contemporaries than a historian’s true duty . . . ’ When viewing the complex structure of a psychological theory, envious ‘rival contemporaries’ undoubtedly will always try, no matter how difficult the job may be, to establish that certain petits faits signicatifs or even merely ‘little facts’ have not been built into the edifice. About twenty years ago, Lashley, in commenting on an experimental investigation concerned with analysing the interdependence of relations and relata and establishing forms of invariance in behaviour, spoke of ‘the tracing of relations through the intricate web of dependent processes which is “mind”‘. Dr Hayek has done more than his share in tracing relations through the intricate web of ‘mind’. His is one of the most interesting and significant books on theoretical psychology that has appeared in this country during the last decades.





