7. THE DENIAL OR DISREGARD OF OUR PROBLEM BY BEHAVIOURISM


1.75. It will help to bring out more clearly the precise meaning of our problem if we contrast our approach with that of two other points of view which require either less or more of any explanation of sensory perception than our statement of the problem demands. This and the next section will accordingly be devoted to an examination, firstly, of the views of a school of thought which either explicitly denied the existence of our problem, or at least proceeded as if it did not exist; and, secondly, to the consideration of an opposite point of view which would probably maintain that even if a complete answer to our problem were achieved, there would still remain unsolved a significant problem concerning the ‘absolute’ or ‘intrinsic’ nature of sensory qualities.

1.76. The point of view which denies, at least by implication, that ours is a genuine problem is (or was?) represented mainly by the classical behaviourists42 and by similar schools aiming at a strictly ‘objective’ psychology. These schools maintained that psychology can entirely dispense with any knowledge of the subjectively experienced mental qualities, and that it ought to confine itself to the study of bodily responses to physical stimuli.

1.77. All the schools of psychology which thus claim to confine themselves to observed physical facts, are, however, in fact, always and inevitably inconsistent in their procedure: they never really avoid using knowledge which according to their professed principles they have no right to use. They almost invariably describe the external stimuli which elicit behaviour not in terms of their physical properties but in terms of their sensory attributes. They naïvely accept as a fact not requiring explanation that different minds treat as equal, similar, or different, groups of stimuli, which physically are not such but merely appear so to our senses.

1.78. The adherents of these schools, in other words, treat as something not requiring explanation the fact that stimuli, which to their senses appear similar, will also appear so to others; and they do this in spite of our knowledge that physically these stimuli may be very different events and in fact may have nothing in common except that very circumstance that whenever they act on us or other people they will evoke the same sensations (and/or responses). They disregard, in other words, the very phenomenon which raises the problem of the existence of a peculiar mental order.

1.79. It might therefore be said that behaviourism, from its own point of view, was not radical and consistent enough, since it took for its starting point a picture of the external world which was derived from our naïve sense experience, instead of taking, as it ought to have done, one obtained from the physical sciences which describe the objective properties of this world. If the behaviourists had been consistent in their desire to take no notice of the qualitative order of their own sense experience, they ought to have started by studying the effects on the organism of physical events of a certain kind, e.g., of light waves of a certain frequency, and then have proceeded to establish experimentally to which of these different physical stimuli the individual responded in the same and to which he responded in a different manner. Before going any further they ought, in other words, to have built up experimentally that classification of the different stimuli which our senses effect.43

1.80. Behaviourists, however, did not seriously try doing anything of the kind. They uncritically accepted the fact that things which are physically different appear alike to our senses, and that things which are physically the same sometimes appear different, or that different things may appear to differ from each other in a manner which is in no way commensurable with the physical differences which objectively exist between them; and they appeared to see no problem in the fact that other organisms classify stimuli in the same manner as we do ourselves, or in a manner different from it.

1.81. This curious blindness to an important problem does not always show itself as blatantly as in the instance reported by W. Köhler in which a behaviourist insisted on referring to a ‘female’ as ‘a stimulus’ to a male bird.44 The error in this instance does not lie merely, as Köhler suggests, in the fact that it involves ‘closing one’s eye to the problem of gestalt and organization.’ It appears already in the disregard of the fact that physically different stimuli affecting different receptors produce the same or similar sensory qualities and therefore are treated as being the same, and in pretending at the same time that sensory qualities do not enter at all into their considerations. (The language of the behaviourist in this instance could be justified only if he meant to imply that the female was always recognized through the same physical stimulus, such as a certain smell, or rather by the stimulation of certain organs of olfaction by definite chemical substances.)

1.82. It would involve the same disregard of the central problem if, e.g., two red spots reflected on different parts of the retina, or the same temperature affecting different parts of the body, were treated as representing the same stimulus. In treating as the same kind of event all events which appear to us to possess the same sensory qualities, behaviourism tacitly assumes the existence of the whole order of such qualities which at the same time it pretends to ignore.

1.83. This acceptance as data of the sensory qualities as they are known to most men from their subjective experience is indeed inevitable in the study of any complex behaviour. But it is only because, while thus accepting them, the behaviourists at the same time deceived themselves about the true character of their procedure, that they avoided the main problem which psychology has to face. If they had been more radical and more consistent in their efforts to link up psychology with the world of physical science, they would have discovered45 that their attempt to explain behaviour without reference to subjective sensory qualities could not be consistently carried through unless it was first shown what determined that system of sensory qualities.

1.84. Like many of the traditional schools of psychology, behaviourism thus treated the problem of mind as if it were a problem of the responses of the individual to an independently or objectively given phenomenal world; while in fact it is the existence of a phenomenal world which is different from the physical world which constitutes the main problem. Behaviourism merely appeared to avoid the problem of mind by confining itself to the study of man’s behaviour in the phenomenal world and by thus treating the main manifestation of mind as a datum rather than as something requiring explanation.

1.85. Although no behaviourist ever consistently adhered to what are the professed principles of his school, and although, if he had, he would never, in the present state of knowledge, have got on to the phenomena in which he was interested, it will be instructive briefly to consider what a consistently ‘objectivist’ study of behaviour would have to be like. It will then be seen that even if the behaviourists had succeeded in carrying out their programme, there would still remain a problem of mind requiring an answer.

1.86. In the first instance, much knowledge that we undoubtedly possess but which is not derived from experimental evidence—such as the knowledge that we are likely to respond in the same manner to different physical stimuli which produce the same sensation—would have to be strictly excluded from such a study of human behaviour. The first task of such a consistently objectivist approach would therefore have to be to ascertain experimentally what to us is the starting point of all knowledge, namely the phenomenal order in which the different stimuli appear in our mind.

1.87. It is at least not inconceivable, although not likely, that by proceeding thus we might in the course of time succeed in reconstructing approximately that grouping of the stimuli which our senses perform. We might then be able to list all the different physical stimuli which, acting on particular receptors and under particular conditions, produce the same sensations (or have always the same influence on the response), and also to reconstruct all the different conditions under which (and all the different respects with regard to which) the several stimuli produce different effects. In other words we might, starting from the physical order of events, experimentally reconstruct the phenomenal order in which these events are reproduced by our senses.46

1.88. This would be merely the first task which a psychology would have to undertake which took the basic idea of behaviourism literally. Only after completing this task could it at least undertake to link directly observable behaviour and physical stimuli. And in order to be quite consistent it would have to define not only the stimuli but also behaviour in strictly physical terms. We need not inquire at this stage whether it is conceivable that this task should ever be fully completed. (We shall later give reasons why we think that this is impossible.) At this point we are concerned with the question whether, even if this task were achieved, there would still remain a problem of the kind with which we are here concerned.

1.89. A solution of that problem would show us what the apparatus of perception does in response to particular stimuli, but not how it does it. Even if we had established a correspondence between all the observed combinations of stimuli and the resulting sensations, we should still be ignorant of the mechanism by which the one kind of order is translated into the other. Our knowledge would be purely descriptive in the sense that it would be confined to a knowledge of the correspondence between observed stimuli and observed responses. We should not possess a theory from which we could derive new conclusions which could be empirically tested.





