5. THE CENTRAL THESIS


2.46. We shall maintain that a classification of the sensory impulses which produces an order strictly analogous to the order of sensory qualities can be effected by a system of connexions through which the impulses can be transmitted from fibre to fibre; and that such a system of connexions which is structurally equivalent to the order of sensory qualities will be built up if, in the course of the development of the species or the individual, connexions are established between fibres in which impulses occur at the same time.

2.47. That such connexions through which impulses are transmitted are created as a result of the simultaneous occurrence of sensory impulses is an almost universally accepted hypothesis which seems indeed indispensable if we are to account for such well-established facts as conditioned reflexes,17 even though we do not yet know exactly how they are established or maintained. For the purposes of our argument it is irrelevant whether the establishment of such connexions involves, as used to be generally assumed, a change in the anatomical structure of the central nervous system (such as the ‘formation of new paths’), or whether, as some more recent investigations suggest, they are based on physiological or functional changes, such as the setting up of some continuous circular flow of impulses in certain pre-existing channels.18

2.48. The transmission of impulses from neuron to neuron within the central nervous system, which is thus conceived as constituting the apparatus of classification, may either take place between different neurons carrying primary impulses, or between such neurons and other (‘internuncial’) neurons which are not directly connected with receptor organs. In the former instance the same event, an impulse in an afferent neuron, may occur either as the primary object of classification or as a ‘symbol’ classifying some other primary impulse. But since, as we shall see, all impulses, whether primary or secondary in this sense, are likely to be subject to further acts of classification, and therefore to appear both as instruments and as objects of classification, this merely complicates the picture but does not alter the general character of the process.

2.49. The point on which the theory of the determination of mental qualities which will be more fully developed in the next chapter differs from the position taken by practically all current psychological theories19 is thus the contention that the sensory (or other mental) qualities are not in some manner originally attached to, or an original attribute of, the individual physiological impulses, but that the whole of these qualities is determined by the system of connexions by which the impulses can be transmitted from neuron to neuron; that it is thus the position of the individual impulse or group of impulses in the whole system of such connexions which gives it its distinctive quality; that this system of connexions is acquired in the course of the development of the species and the individual by a kind of ‘experience’ or ‘learning’; and that it reproduces therefore at every stage of its development certain relationships existing in the physical environment between the stimuli evoking the impulses. (We shall see in Chapter IV that this ‘physical environment’ within which the central nervous system operates includes the milieu intérieur, i.e., the organism itself in so far as it acts independently of the higher nervous centres; and in Chapter V how this ‘experience’ differs from experience in the ordinary meaning of the word.)

2.50. This central contention may also be expressed more briefly by saying that ‘we do not first have sensations which are then preserved by memory, but it is as a result of physiological memory that the physiological impulses are converted into sensations. The connexions between the physiological elements are thus the primary phenomenon which creates the mental phenomena.’20

2.51. Although suggestions of a theory of mental phenomena on these lines are implicit in much of the current discussion of those problems by physiological psychologists, the consequences of a systematic application of this basic idea appear never to have been worked out consistently. What follows is little more than an attempt to elaborate the main implications of this thesis. It will be seen that its consistent development leads to rather important conclusions and assists in the clearing up of several old puzzles.





