3. DUALISM AND MATERIALISM


8.40. Because the account of the determination of mental qualities which has been given here explains them by the operation of processes of the same kind as those which we observe in the material world, it is likely to be described as a ‘materialistic’ theory. Such a description in itself would matter very little if it were not for certain erroneous ideas associated with the term materialism which not only would prejudice some people against a theory thus described but, what is more important, would also suggest that it implies certain conclusions which are almost the opposite of those which in fact follow from it. In the true sense of the word ‘materialistic’ it might even be argued that our theory is less materialistic than the dualistic theories which postulate a distinct mind ‘substance’.

8.41. The dualistic theories are a product of the habit, which man has acquired in his early study of nature, of assuming that in every instance where he observed a peculiar and distinct process it must be due to the presence of a corresponding peculiar and distinct substance. The recognition of such a peculiar material substance came to be regarded as an adequate explanation of the process produced.

8.42. It is a curious fact that, although in the realm of nature in general we no longer accept as an adequate explanation the postulate of a peculiar substance possessing the capacity of producing the phenomena we wish to explain, we still resort to this old habit where mental events are concerned. The mind ‘stuff’ or ‘substance’ is a conception formed in analogy to the different kinds of matter supposedly responsible for the different kinds of material phenomena. It is, to use an old term in its literal sense, the result of a ‘hylomorphic’ manner of thinking. Yet in whatever manner we define substance, to think of mind as a substance is to ascribe to mental events some attributes for whose existence we have no evidence and which we postulate solely on the analogy of what we know of material phenomena.8

8.43. In the strict sense of the terms employed an account of mental phenomena which avoids the conception of a distinct mental substance is therefore the opposite of materialistic, because it does not attribute to mind any property which we derive from our acquaintance with matter. In being content to regard mind as a peculiar order of events, different from the order of events which we encounter in the physical world, but determined by the same kind of forces as those that rule in that world, it is indeed the only theory which is not materialistic.9

8.44. Superficially there may seem to exist a closer connexion between the theory presented here and the so-called ‘double aspect theories’ of the relations between mind and body. To scribe our theory as such, however, would be misleading. What could be regarded as the ‘physical aspect’ of this double-faced entity would not be the individual neural processes but only the complete order of all these processes; but this order, if we knew it in full, would then not be another aspect of what we know as mind but would be mind itself. We cannot directly observe how this order is formed by its physical elements, but can only infer it. But if we could complete the theoretical reconstruction of this order from its elements and then disregard all the properties of the elements which are not relevant to the existence of this order as a whole, we should have a complete description of the order we call mind—just as in describing a machine we can disregard many properties of its parts, such as their colour, and consider only those which are essential to the functioning of the machine as a whole. (Cf. 2.28–2.30.)

8.45. This order which we call mind is thus the order prevailing in a particular part of the physical universe—that part of it which is ourselves. It is an order which we ‘know’ in a way which is different from the manner in which we know the order of the physical universe around us. What we have tried to do here is to show that the same kind of regularities which we have learnt to discover in the world around us are in princple also capable of building up an order like that constituting our mind. That such a kind of sub-order can be formed within that order which we have discovered in the external universe does not yet mean, however, that we must be able to explain how the particular order which constitutes our mind is placed in that more comprehensive order. In order to achieve this it would be necessary to construct, with special reference to the human mind, a detailed reproduction of the model-object relation which it involves such as we have sketched schematically before in order to illustrate the general principle (5.77–5.91).

8.46. While our theory leads us to deny any ultimate dualism of the forces governing the realms of mind and that of the physical world respectively, it forces us at the same time to recognize that for practical purposes we shall always have to adopt a dualistic view. It does this by showing that any explanation of mental phenomena which we can hope ever to attain cannot be sufficient to ‘unify’ all our knowledge, in the sense that we should become able to substitute statements about particular physical events (or classes of physical events) for statements about mental events without thereby changing the meaning of the statement.

8.47. In this specific sense we shall never be able to bridge the gap between physical and mental phenomena; and for practical purposes, including in this the procedure appropriate to the different sciences, we shall permanently have to be content with a dualistic view of the world. This, however, raises a further problem which must be more systematically considered in the remaining sections of this chapter.





