5. MECHANICAL AND PURPOSIVE BEHAVIOUR


5.63. The principles by which the transmission of the individual impulses in the central nervous system is determined are of a kind which might well be described as ‘mechanical’ in the most general meaning of the word; yet the result of the interplay of these transmissions in the integrated nervous system will clearly show characteristics which are not only very different from, but in some respects even the opposite of, those which we commonly associate with that term. It will therefore be useful explicitly to enumerate the points on which the multiple process of classification will act in a manner different from what we ordinarily regard as mechanical.

5.64. By a ‘mechanism’ or a ‘mechanical process’ we usually understand a complex of moving parts possessing a constant structure which uniquely determines its operations, so that it will always respond in the same manner to a given external influence, repeat under the same external conditions the same movements, and which is capable only of a limited number of operations. Such a mechanism cannot ‘purposively’ adapt its operations to produce different results in the same external conditions; and it is essentially ‘passive’, in the sense that which of the different operations of which it is capable it will perform will depend exclusively on the external circumstances.

5.65. In all these respects the operation of a system organized on the principles here described will show opposite characteristics. It will, as a result of its own operations, continuously change its structure and alter the range of operation of which it is capable. It will scarcely ever respond twice in exactly the same manner to the same external conditions. And it will as a result of ‘experience’ acquire the capacity of performing entirely new actions. Its actions will appear self-adaptive and purposive, and it will in general be ‘active’ in the sense that what at any given moment will determine the character of its operation will be the pre-existing state of its internal processes as much as the external influences acting on it.

5.66. Since the structure of connexions in the nervous system is modified by every new action exercised upon it by the external world, and since the stimuli acting on it do not operate by themselves but always in conjunction with the processes called forth by the pre-existing excitatory state, it is obvious that the response to a given combination of stimuli on two different occasions is not likely to be exactly the same. Because it is the whole history of the organism which will determine its action, new factors will contribute to this determination on the later occasion which were not present on the first. We shall find not only that the same set of external stimuli will not always produce the same responses, but also that altogether new responses will occur, if we regard as one response not the movement of an individual muscle but the whole complex of co-ordinated movement of the organism.

5.67. The appearance of such new forms of behaviour is the effect of the circumstance already noted (4.25, 4.49) that the individual motor impulses sent out by the higher centres will be signals not for particular movements but for classes or kinds of actions, and that the particular movement that will occur will be determined by the joint effect of many such general ‘directives’. The signal for a particular succession of movements of various muscles may for instance be modified by other signals indicating that it is to take place fast and with the avoidance of noise, or that other types of modification of the basic pattern are required. Any one particular movement will thus be determined by the higher centres signalling the different ‘qualities’ required from the action, and these different ‘qualities’ of behaviour will be closely interwoven (4.46) with the qualities ascribed to events in the external world.

5.68. The adaptive and purposive behaviour of the organism is accounted for by the existence of the ‘model’ of the environment formed by the pattern of impulses in the nervous system. In so far as this model represents situations which might come about as the result of the existing external situation, this means that behaviour will be guided by representations of the consequences to be expected from different kinds of behaviour. If the model can preform or predict the effects of different courses of action, and pre-select among the effects of alternative courses those which in the existing state of the organism are ‘desirable’, there is no reason why it should not also be capable of directing the organism towards the particular course of action which has thus been ‘mapped out’ for it.11

5.69. In order that the ‘desired result’ should operate as a cause determining behaviour, it must be evoked by, or form part of the following of, the reproduction of the actual environment and of the governing state of drive or urge. It must be a representation of the innumerable combinations of possible outcomes of the existing situation which the convergent associations tend to evoke—associations which are attached to the elements of the representation of that environment, and which give these representations their significance or meaning. The ‘desired’ result will be singled out from the many possible outcomes of the existing situation because it will form part of the following not only of the environment but also of the ‘urge’ or ‘drive’ for a certain class of results. That representation of the results which seem both possible in the existing external situation and ‘desirable’ in view of the state of the organism will thus be strengthened by the summation of two different streams of nervous impulses. This result will be represented with greater strength and distinctness and will thereby come to exercise the determining influence on further behaviour.

5.70. Such a representation of certain possible outcomes of the existing situation, which are strengthened because they appear desirable, constitute, however, only a first step towards purposive behaviour. In most situations there will exist many possible courses of action which, in the sense that they have in the past become associated with the achievement of that goal, will appear to be ‘directed’ towards a desirable goal; but only some of these courses of action will be appropriate in the particular situation. There will, in general, also exist more than one possible goal of the desired kind, and more than one way of achieving any one goal. The determination of purposive action involves, therefore, a further process of selection among the various different courses of action which might satisfy the initiating urge.

5.71. The interpretation of the pattern of moving impulses as a model of the environment, which can try out possible developments in that environment, suggests answers to both these problems. We shall first consider the mechanism by which will be eliminated inappropriate moves which, though they would produce the desired result if those features of the environment which evoke that response were alone present, yet cannot in fact produce that result because other elements in the environment constitute an obstacle to the completion of this course of action.

5.72. Such a situation would have its neural counterpart in the impulses representing different parts of the environment tending to set up contradictory or incompatible chains of associations which will mutually blot each other out. Because representations of possible developments in the environment will have significance or meaning only as parts of an ordered picture of that environment, the various chains of associations set up by the elements of the representation of a complex situation will produce meaningful results only if they fit into the general order of such representations. The general spatial and temporal order of that representation will, e.g., require that either one thing or another must be in a given place, or that a thing must be either at rest or in motion, etc., etc. In so far as the chains of associations, set up by different parts of the representation of the environment, lead in this sense to conflicting results, e.g., to the representation of two different things as being in the same place at the same moment, or of two incompatible attributes being attached to a particular thing, these tendencies will neutralize each other: no distinct representation will result which could become the starting point for further associations.12

5.73. Of the many sequences of representations which different parts of the representation of the existing environment tend to evoke, only some will thus in fact lead to representations of meaningful results. The mechanism which in this manner eliminates abortive courses of action must also prevent, however, that at any moment more than one of the possible alternative courses of actions should be fully represented, although the model might successively try out different courses of action. How will it be determined which of the various courses promising to produce a desirable result will in fact be selected?

5.74. The first point to be noticed is that the desirability of one particular result will not be the only factor of an affective character which will be operative in such a situation. Most of the different courses of action between which the organism will have to choose, and most of the intermediate stages through which these different courses of action will lead it, will also possess affective qualities—they will themselves be either attractive or repellant in various degrees. In particular, the representation of the effort involved in the different courses of action will normally be charged with the representation of pain, or operate as something to be avoided, unless compensated for by the greater attraction of the result. The interaction of all these forces in the end will bring it about that from the possible courses the ‘path of least resistance’ will be chosen; while all the unduly painful courses will be avoided which might produce the same result, as well as courses leading to alternative results but requiring greater effort.

5.75. That such guidance by a model which reproduces, and experimentally tries out, the possibilities offered by a given situation, can produce action which is purposive to any desired degree, is shown by the fact that machines could be produced on this principle (and that some, such as the predictor for antiaircraft guns, or the automatic pilots for aircraft, have actually been produced) which show all the characteristics of purposive behaviour.13 Such machines, however, are still comparatively primitive and restricted in the range of their operations compared with the central nervous system. They would be able to take account of only a minute fraction of the number of different facts of which the central nervous system takes account, and they would lack the capacity of learning from experience. But although for this reason such machines cannot yet be described as brains,14 with regard to purposiveness they differ from a brain merely in degree and not in kind.15

5.76. It is notoriously difficult to discuss purposive behaviour without employing terms which suggest the presence of conscious mental states. The phenomenon of purposive action, however, does not presuppose the existence of an elaborate mental order like the one which we know from conscious experience, and still less the presence of consciousness itself. Some degree of purposiveness can be attained by structures infinitely more simple than those which constitute the mental order, and once we have reached the degree of complexity in the ordering of stimuli and responses characteristic of the latter, it does not present a new or separate problem.





