3. STIMULUS, IMPULSE, AND THE THEORY OF THE SPECIFIC ENERGY OF NERVES


1.22. Before we proceed farther it is necessary to define more precisely some of the terms we shall have constantly to employ. This applies especially to the terms ‘stimulus’ and ‘nervous impulse’ and more particularly to the sense in which we shall speak of particular ‘kinds’ of stimuli or of the same and of different nervous impulses. It will be convenient also to consider already at this stage the meaning and significance of the famous principle of the ‘specific energy of nerves.’

1.23. The term stimulus will be used throughout this discussion to describe an event external to the nervous system which causes (through or without the mediation of special receptor organs) processes in some nerve fibres which by these fibres are conducted from the point at which the stimulus acts to some other point of the nervous system. It appears that at least some receptor organs are sensitive not to the continuous action of any one given stimulus but only to changes in that stimulus. Whatever it is that is produced in the nerve fibre and propagated through it we shall call the impulse.

1.24. The physical event acting as a stimulus is described as such only with regard to its action on the receptors.12 This leads sometimes to a rather confusing distinction between the stimulus and its ‘source’, sometimes described as the stimulus object. What will here be described as stimulus will always be the proximal stimulus,13 i.e., the last known physical event in the chain which leads to the production of the impulse. In some instances (particularly in the case of odours) this proximal physical stimulus, however, is not certainly known, and we must be satisfied with reference to some more remote event which has then to be regarded as the source of an unknown proximal stimulus.

1.25. It is necessary from the outset carefully to avoid the assumption that to each kind of sensation there will always correspond one stimulus of a particular kind. Not only can several different stimuli produce the same sensation, but it appears that in many instances, and perhaps as a rule, several different stimuli, acting on different receptors, may be required to produce a particular sensation.14

1.26. Since our central problem is the manner in which different stimuli affect our nervous system, or how they are classified by it, we clearly cannot make our starting point that classification of the stimuli which our senses perform. The distinction between different stimuli, or between different kinds of stimuli, must be independent of the different effects they have on the organism. This independence can never be complete, since all our knowledge of the external events is derived from our sensory experience. But it can be independent in the sense that we can classify the stimuli not according to their direct effects on our senses, but according to the effects which they exercise on other external events, which in turn act as stimuli on our senses. This classification of the events which act as stimuli, according to their effects on other events which in turn are classified according to their effects on still others, is, of course the classification of the stimuli developed by the physical sciences; and it is this which we must adopt.

1.27. We shall, e.g., have to regard as the same physical stimulus not all light which appears to us to have the same colour, or all substances which smell alike, but only light waves which in various combinations with other physical objects (usually apparatus designed for the purpose) produce the same effects, or substances which in their chemical composition are identical.

1.28. For our purpose it will also be necessary to regard as different any stimuli which are physically identical but which act on different parts of the body, since it is by no means obvious (or always true) that such stimuli should produce the same sensory qualities. The question why as a rule stimulation of different individual receptors by physically identical stimuli should produce similar sensations is in fact the simplest form in which our problem arises.

1.29. The production of a nervous impulse by a stimulus is usually mediated by the selective action of specific receptor organs which respond to certain kinds of stimuli but not to others. This selectivity of the receptor organs is, however, not perfect. Even the so-called ‘adequate stimuli’ to which a given receptor normally responds, consist as a rule not only of one precisely defined physical stimulus (such as, e.g., waves of a particular frequency) but to a more or less wide range of such stimuli extending, e.g., over a certain band of frequencies. In addition to this, some events other than the adequate stimuli can often set up impulses in a given nerve fibre. An impulse in the visual nerves and the consequent sensation of light may, for instance, be caused by a blow on the eyeball.

1.30. The receptor organs thus already perform a certain sorting out, or classification, of the stimuli, and there will be no strict correspondence between the different stimuli and the different impulses. Moreover, only a small part of the physical events in our environment are capable of acting as stimuli or are recorded by impulses in the nerve fibres. Of the continuous range of electromagnetic waves only a very small band acts on our organs of vision while by far the greater part of this range does not act as a stimulus on our nerves.

1.31. Impulses in a particular sensory nerve fibre may thus be set up by any one of a group of stimuli which physically may be similar or altogether different. But if a given fibre responds to any of these stimuli, the character of the impulse transmitted will always be the same, irrespective of the nature of the stimulus. The effect of the impulse is independent of the nature of the particular kind of stimulus which evokes it, and any characteristic effects which this particular impulse brings about must therefore be due to something connected with that impulse and not to any attributes of the stimulus.

1.32. This is the main contention of the so-called principle of the specific energy of nerves. When it was first enounced by Johannes Müller, it was aimed against the conception that the nervous impulses transmitted some attribute of the stimulus to the brain; and it was intended to emphasize that the sensation produced depended solely on the fibre which carried the impulse and not on what had caused that impulse. The form in which it was stated, however, was not free from ambiguity and soon gave rise to a new misconception.

1.33. The fact that the theory was called the theory of the specific energy of nerves led to its being connected with one particular alternative explanation of the determination of sensory qualities which is no less questionable than the theory which it was intended to displace. On this interpretation it was understood to mean that, if it was not the physical properties of the stimuli which determined the quality of the resulting sensations, it must be some property of the individual impulses proceeding in the different fibres which in some sense ‘corresponds’ to the differences of the sensory qualities.

1.34. Although this is by no means a necessary consequence of the proposition which Johannes Müller had been anxious to establish, it was widely assumed, in fact, that the sensory qualities produced by impulses in different fibres would be different, similar or equal according as the physical properties of the corresponding impulses differed from or resembled each other. This interpretation was to some extent suggested by Müller’s own formulation of the theory in which he asserted more than was necessary to establish his conclusions. In his summary of his theory he stated that ‘the sensation is not the conduction of a quality or state of an external body to the consciousness, but the conduction to the consciousness of a quality or state of our sensory nerves induced by an external cause’;15 and he went on to emphasize that these qualities are different with the different senses.

1.35. The recognition, however, that the difference of the sensory qualities is not due to the communication of a difference in the stimuli does by no means make the conclusion inevitable that it must then be a difference in the properties of the impulses taking place in the different fibres, which accounts for them. To interpret the theory of the specific energy of nerves in this sense is merely to accept at this stage an explanation similar to that rejected at the earlier stage: the specific character of the effect of a particular impulse need be neither due to the attributes of the stimulus which caused it, nor to the attributes of the impulse, but may be determined by the position in the structure of the nervous system of the fibre which carries the impulse.16

1.36. We do not only possess no information which would entitle us to assume that the impulses carried by the different fibres differ qualitatively, but, what is more important, it also seems impossible to conceive of such differences between the physical attributes of the individual impulses that they could be said in any sense to ‘correspond’ to the differences of the sensory qualities. Even if qualitative differences between the impulses were discovered, this would not yet provide an answer to our problem. It would still be necessary to show how these differences in quality determined the different effects which the different impulses exercise upon each other; and while it is conceivable that these latter differences may be connected with differences in their individual physical attributes, this need not be so. The important point here is that no differences of the individual impulses as such would provide an explanation of the differences between their mental equivalents, and that any differences of their causal connexions with each other seem at least as likely to be due to structural connexions as to qualitative affinities. This is important especially because the hope of thereby providing an explanation of the differences in mental qualities appears to have been the prime motive for the persistent and unsuccessful search for ‘specific energies’, and because the same conception seems also largely responsible for the persistence of the belief in a ‘pure core’ of sensation.17

1.37. The evidence which we possess suggests, in fact, that the impulses carried by the different fibres, at least within any one sense modality, are qualitatively identical, so that, if we were to cut two sensory fibres and to re-connect the lower part of each with the upper part of the other, they would still function but exchange the results which an impulse in either would cause. It seems, therefore, that the cause of the specific effects of the impulses in different fibres must be sought, not in the attributes of the individual impulses, but in the position of the fibre in the central organization of the nervous system.





