1. SENSATION AND THE ORGANISM


4.1. In the preceding chapters the apparatus for the classification of impulses has been represented as if it were a neutral, self-contained, and completely centralized system which passively registered the simultaneous occurrence of impulses set up by external stimuli and thus came to reflect the significance which the stimuli possessed in the environment of this system. Such a passive apparatus of registration is conceivable, and to consider it served to bring out the general principle of our theory. But it would be something very different from the sort of apparatus which the nervous system constitutes. While it would register the significance of the stimuli in the environment, it would not indicate the special significance which they possess for the living organism of which that apparatus forms a part.

4.2. The exclusive concentration on the order that might be created by the establishment of the connexions between sensory impulses only has been adopted quite deliberately (3.18). It was intended to emphasize one aspect of the more complete picture which, under the influence of behaviourism, has been somewhat neglected during the last generation. The emphasis which was placed during that period on the observable peripheral responses brought it about that the rôle played by the higher nervous centres has been largely disregarded, and that the whole relation between stimulus and response has often been treated as if the higher centres did not exist. In the preceding chapters we have gone to the other extreme and practically disregarded everything except the central effects of any sensory impulse. This temporary disregard of the fact that the nervous system operates within a living and acting organism, which in some measure is capable of adaptive and regulative behaviour apart from control by the higher nervous centres, must now be corrected by an explicit consideration of these facts.

4.3. In the present chapter, therefore, we shall have to examine not only the effects of the sensory on the motor processes, but also have to give much greater attention than we have yet done to the sensory impulses set up by the various processes in the body, that is, to the registration of stimuli which originate in what has appropropriately been called the milieu intérieur, the internal environment, within which the central nervous system functions. Of the latter we shall have to conceive as a sort of apparatus of control superimposed upon a living whole rather than as a self-contained and fully centralized structure of its own.

4.4. In turning to these problems we are entering a field in which the very attitudes which during the past generation have led to a comparative neglect of our main problem have led to great progress and the accumulation of a wealth of new knowledge. We have nothing to add to this and cannot even hope to give the barest outline of all the relevant facts which a more systematic survey of the field would have to take into account. The sole purpose of this chapter is to show how our theory of the determination of sensory qualities fits into the picture of the ‘integrated action of the nervous system’ which is gradually emerging.

4.5. At the same time it should be pointed out, however, that in one respect in which the task which we are undertaking is most in need of a solid foundation, theoretical biology is only just beginning to provide the needed theoretical tools and concepts. An adequate account of the highly purposive character of the action of the central nervous system would require as its foundation a more generally accepted biological theory of the nature of adaptive and purposive processes than is yet available.

4.6. The consideration of the inter-relations between sensory and motor processes will also make it necessary to take more explicit notice of the hierarchical order of the central nervous system. We shall see that the organization of all connexions between sensory and motor processes on many superimposed levels, and the corresponding existence of a hierarchy of centres of increasing comprehensiveness, is of the greatest importance for the understanding of the sensory order.

4.7. In some measure connected with this hierarchical order of the nervous system is the distinction between the phylogenetic and the ontogenetic aspects of the processes in question, or between those connexions which are inherited and those which are acquired by the individual. There is, however, not a great deal which, in the present state of our knowledge, can be said on this question; we shall on the whole have to continue to disregard this distinction and to represent the process of the building up of the sensory order as if it took place in the course of the life of the individual.

4.8. The relation between sensory and motor processes which we shall have to consider is a double one: we shall have to consider both how various complexes of sensory impulses will influence behaviour, and how in turn the motor responses will influence sensory discrimination. The latter question will make necessary some consideration of the interoceptive and proprioceptive impulses, i.e., those impulses which record not external stimuli but various states of different parts of the organism.

4.9. A more systematic discussion of the connexion between the sensory and the motor apparatus would also have to include an examination of the manner in which the efferent (or motor) impulses are themselves ordered so as to produce certain co-ordinated patterns of movement, and of how the bundles of efferent impulses interact with the proprioceptive afferent impulses by which the resulting movements are recorded at the centres. In this respect we can, however, attempt no more than the barest sketch which must serve as an indication of the sort of problems which a fuller elaboration of our theory would have to answer.

4.10. In examining the significance of the proprioceptive impulses we shall have briefly to consider not only the effects which the impulses recording postures and movements accompanying perceptions have on sensory discrimination, and the rôle played in this connexion by the back-reports of responses which are produced by the stimuli at various subcortical levels; but in particular also to examine the significance of the various ‘biogenic’ impulses which are caused by the vegetative processes of the organism and are closely connected with the various ‘urges’, ‘drives’, or ‘wants’. The latter are, of course, essential for any explanation of purposive behaviour.





