2. OLDER THEORIES COMPRISED AS SPECIAL CASES


7.10. There is no need here to mention again the various instances where our approach eliminates what now appear to be false questions. We can at once turn to the several instances where our theory embraces as special cases theories which in the past have been advanced in order to explain particular phenomena. Some of these instances have been noticed earlier and now need be mentioned only briefly.

7.11. The first instance of this kind which has been discussed earlier (3.40–3.45) is Berkeley’s theory of spatial vision and the more general theories of space perception which have developed from it. The account of the determination of the spatial order of perception by the co-ordination between the various sense modalities and the kinesthetic sensations is of course merely one particular instance of the theory of the determination of sensory qualities developed here.

7.12. Another similar instance of an anticipation in a particular field which we have already mentioned is the James-Lange theory, of emotions. As has been shown before (4.70–4.72), this theory, carefully restated, might be regarded as a special case of our theory.

7.13. In the case at least of von Helmholtz the emphasis on the effect of experience in determining sensory qualities goes far beyond ascribing to experience the creation of their spatial order, and it probably is due mainly to his influence that it is to-day widely recognized that ‘the manner in which we see things of the external world is sometimes affected by experience to an overwhelming extent’ and that ‘it is often difficult to decide which of our visual experiences are determined immediately by sensation and which, on the contrary, are determined by experience and practice.’8 His conception of the ‘unconscious inference’,9 by which stimuli which do not lead to conscious experience are yet utilized in the perception of a complex position, comes very close to the theory developed here. Yet von Helmholtz, like all later writers following on these lines, instead of drawing the conclusion that the factors to which he attributed ‘overwhelming importance’ in determining the sensory qualities might be the sole factors which determine them, in fact insisted that nothing could be recognized as sensation which is demonstrably due to experience10—thus giving, in fact, support to the conception of a pure core of sensation.

7.14. The same applies to the group of theories which have furthest developed this line of thought, the Reproduktionspsychologie of B. Erdmann, R. Dodge, H. Henning and F. Schumann, which, with its stress on the ‘residua’ which determine sensory qualities, came very close to the position taken here, yet never ceased to distinguish between a ‘stimulus component’ and a ‘residual component’, the former of which still corresponds to the ‘pure core’ of sensation.11

7.15. The relation which exists between our theory and the views of the gestalt school is of a somewhat different character and has already been discussed (3.70–3.79). As was then pointed out, the present approach may be regarded as an attempt to raisc, with regard to all kinds of sensory experiences, the question which the gestalt school raised in connexion with the perception of configurations. And it seems to us, that in some respects at least, our theory may be regarded as a consistent development of the approach of the gestalt school.12

7.16. Another instance of a connexion between our theory and a familiar older view has not yet been explicitly mentioned: the obvious relations which exist between it and the basic ideas of the old association psychology. Our view agrees, of course, with associationism in the endeavour to trace all mental processes to connexions established by experience between certain elements. It differs from it by regarding the elements between which such connexions are established as not themselves mental in character but as material events which only through those connexions are arranged in a new order in which they obtain the specific significance characteristic of mental events (5.52).

7.17. This is a step which James Mill very nearly made when he briefly suggested that similarity (‘resemblance’) might be dispensed with as a ‘principle of association’ and be reduced to a ‘particular case’ of the ‘law of frequency’ of co-occurrence.13 This promising beginning was, however, cut short by the somewhat uncomprehending comment added to this passage by his son, who described the brief hint as ‘perhaps the least successful attempt at simplification and generalization of the laws of mental phenomena, to be found in the work.’ The only further development of this idea is to be found in the writings of the last of the old association psychologists, G. H. Lewes, which never seem to have received the attention which they deserve.14

7.18. Finally, we may perhaps once more mention that within the framework of this theory the conception of events which are mental but not conscious receives, for the first time so far as we are aware, a clear meaning. In consequence it provides a systematic place for whatever of the various theories of the unconscious will prove permanent additions to knowledge.





