3. ELEMENTARY FORMS OF CLASSIFICATION


3.25. If we now turn to consider the significance of the fact that the different sensory neurons in the cortex will have acquired various sets of connexions with other neurons, it will at once be evident that if each of two or more neurons should be connected with exactly the same other neurons, so that an impulse occurring in any one of the former will be transmitted to the same group of other neurons, the effects of an impulse in any one of the former will be the same. Their position in the whole structure of connexions would be identical and their functional significance would be the same. (Cf., 2.5).

3.26. With this extreme instance of complete identity of all connexions possessed by a number of neurons we may at once contrast the opposite instance where a number of neurons possess no common connexions with the same other neurons. Between these two limiting cases there may exist any number of intermediate positions: groups of neurons which have a larger or smaller part of their connexions in common. We can thus speak of greater or smaller degrees of similarity of the position of the different neurons in the whole system of such connexions.

3.27. This similarity of the positions of the individual neurons in the whole system of connexions can vary not only in degree but also in kind. Of three neurons, a, b, and c, possessing the same number of connexions with other neurons, a may have the same number of connexions in common with b as it has with c, which would mean (at least if all these connexions were also of the same strength) that the similarities between the positions of a and b and between the positions of a and c were of the same degree. Yet these similarities might be of different kinds, because some or all of the connexions which a had in common with b might be different from those which a had in common with c. This means, of course, that although the position of a in the whole system of connexions would be similar to that of b and to that of c, there might be much less similarity or no similarity at all between the positions of b and c. This merely expresses the fact that the relation of similarity is non-transitive (1.46).

3.28. A very high degree of similarity in the position of the different neurons in the system of connexions is likely to exist where-ever the neurons are served by receptors sensitive to stimuli which always or almost always occur together. This is most likely where these receptors are not only sensitive to the same kind of physical stimuli but also situated in close proximity.

3.29. If we can show how all the afferent impulses which give rise to sensations of the same quality are likely to be transmitted to the same group of further neurons, and by this fact will be distinguished from impulses producing different sensory qualities, we shall have provided an answer to our problem in the simplest form in which it occurs: we shall have explained the equivalence of the impulses occurring in different fibres. There are several obvious reasons which lead us to expect that such a classification of certain impulses as equivalent in all or some respects will be brought about as a result of the relative frequency with which different impulses occur together.

3.30. In the first instance, it is on the whole more likely that receptor organs sensitive to physically similar stimuli will be excited at the same time, and it is therefore to be expected that especially close connexions will be formed between the central neurons to which the corresponding impulses are transmitted. Where the physical stimuli can vary continuously in one or more dimensions, as in the case of light or sound, mixtures or bands of various frequencies of light or sound waves usually occur together and those which are more closely similar in a physical sense probably also occur more frequently together. It is thus to be expected that, e.g., not only all impulses set up by light waves (or by sound waves) will acquire some common connexions but also that there will be more such common connexions according as these stimuli are more or less closely akin physically.

3.31. These connexions are likely to be closest where the receptors are situated near to each other, but we shall also expect all the receptors of a given organism which are sensitive to the same kind of physical stimuli to be frequently excited at the same time, so that a fairly dense net of connexions will be formed between the corresponding central neurons. Similarly we shall expect fairly close connexions to be formed between the neurons served by neighbouring receptors which are sensitive to stimuli which occur frequently together because they emanate from the same physical objects, such as pressure and temperature, certain chemical agents acting simultaneously on mouth and nose, etc., etc.

3.32. Secondly, any particular kind of stimulus will usually occur more frequently in the company of some other stimuli than in that of others, and the connexions between the central neurons corresponding to physically different stimuli will thus come to reflect the relative frequency in which these different stimuli occur together. What has been said before about the specially close connexions between impulses caused by physical stimuli of the same kind will also apply to impulses caused by stimuli which, although they are not, like all light waves, physically closely similar, at least, like movement and sound, usually occur together.

3.33. Thirdly, in many instances it is likely that certain kinds of stimuli will usually act together on the organism when the organism itself is in a particular state of balance or of activity, either because the stimulus regularly occurs under conditions producing that state, or because it occurs periodically so as to coincide with some rhythm of the body. The impulses which register such external stimuli will then become connected with impulses received from the proprioceptors which register the different states of the organism itself.

3.34. The result of all this will be that a system of connexions will be formed which will record the relative frequency with which in the history of the organism the different groups of internal and external stimuli have acted together. Each individual impulse or group of impulses will on its occurrence evoke other impulses which correspond to the other stimuli which in the past have usually accompanied its occurrence. We shall call this bundle of secondary impulses which each primary impulse will set up through these acquired connexions the following of the primary impulse. It will be the total or partial identity of this following of the primary impulse which makes them members of the same class.5





