4. DIFFERENCES IN QUALITY ARE DIFFERENCES IN THE EFFECTS


1.38. That the similarities and differences between the experienced sensory qualities do not correspond strictly to the differences and similarities between the physical attributes of the stimuli has become most familiar in connexion with the perception of configurations or gestalts. We all readily recognize as the same tune two different series of tones, or as the same shape or figure structures of different size and colour. In all these instances groups of stimuli which individually may be altogether different do yet as groups evoke the same sensory quality or are classified by our senses as the same gestalt.

1.39. But, though the fact that physically different stimuli produce similar sensory qualities is perhaps most conspicuous in connexion with the perception of ‘wholes’, it is no less present or less important where more simple or ‘elementary’ sensations are concerned. The fact that physically similar stimuli which act on different individual receptors and therefore set up impulses in different fibres evoke the same sensory quality raises a real problem. And the question why different physical stimuli for which different receptor organs are sensitive, and even physically similar stimuli acting on different kinds of receptor organs, should produce different sensations raises a problem of the same character.

1.40. While as a rule the same kind of physical stimuli acting on different receptor organs produce the same sensory quality, this is generally true only if they act on receptors of the same kind and even then not in all instances. The same vibration which, if perceived through the ear, will be experienced as a sound, may be experienced as a vibration by the sense of touch. In other instances ‘the same external agent in one case produces light, in another warmth.’18 The same temperature may be experienced as hot, cold, or pain according as it affects different end organs.19 The same chemical stimulus may produce different sensory qualities according as it affects the mucous membranes of the eye or of the mouth.20 And an electrical stimulation seems to be capable of evoking an even greater variety of different sensations. Moreover, even the same stimulus affecting the same receptors may produce different sensations according as different other stimuli operate at the same time on other parts of the nervous system.

1.41. The same sensory quality, on the other hand, may be evoked by different physical stimuli. This happens not only where a particular receptor organ is excited by several different stimuli. In such a case any one of the different stimuli will, of course, evoke the same impulse. But impulses or groups of impulses set up in different fibres by different stimuli also often produce the same sensory quality. The classical instance is the case of colour vision and particularly the sensation of ‘white’ which can be produced by an infinite variety of different mixtures of light rays. But this same fact that physically different stimuli acting on different kinds of receptors produce the same sensory qualities seem to be of very frequent occurrence.

1.42. There exists, therefore, no one-to-one correspondence between the kinds (or the physical properties) of the different physical stimuli and the dimensions in which they can vary, on the one hand, and the different kinds of sensory qualities which they produce and their various dimensions, on the other. The manner in which the different physical stimuli can vary and the different physical dimensions in which they can be arranged have no exact counterpart in the manner in which the sensory qualities caused by them will differ from each other, or in the dimensions in which these sensory qualities can be arranged. This is the central fact to which we have referred when we insisted that the two orders, the physical order of the stimuli and the phenomenal or mental order of the sensory qualities, are different.

1.43. It has long been believed that, e.g., in the field of vision the three dimensions of the stimulus, wave-length, homogeneity and intensity correspond to the three phenomenal dimensions of visual experience, hue, saturation and brightness, and that similarly in the field of hearing frequency and intensity as physical dimensions of the stimulus correspond to pitch and loudness respectively as the phenomenal dimensions of sensation. Recent work, however, has amply shown that within any given modality a change in one dimension of the stimulus may affect almost any dimension of the sensation. Hue depends not only on wave-length but also on intensity; pitch not only on frequency but also on intensity.21

1.44. The orders or dimensions of the stimuli and of the sensations, moreover, not only show no one-to-one correspondence; they also differ in their general character. Any one of the physical dimensions of light and particularly wave-length which is mainly (though not exclusively) the cause of variation in colour, varies on a linear scale, while phenomenal colours can be arranged in a continuous circle in which the order of the wavelength is preserved, but the gap between the two extremes of the spectrum, yellowish red and violet, is closed by pure (or ‘unique’) red and purple which correspond to no distinct wave-length but can be produced only by various mixtures of different wave-lengths. Moreover, continuous variations of the stimuli often produce discontinuous variations in the sensory qualities22, while in at least one case a continuous variation in the sensory qualities, namely from cold to hot, is brought about by what we must regard as a discontinuous variation of the stimuli, since the objectively continuous variation of temperature acts on the organism through different receptor organs.

1.45. It may be generally said that the organization of the sensory order, as represented by the various geometrical figures (such as the colour octohedron, Titchener’s touch pyramid, Henning’s smell prism and taste tetrahedron) by which psychologists have described the dimensions in which the sensory qualities vary, are by no means identical with the order of the corresponding physical stimuli and often differ very substantially from them. The fact that the two orders resemble each other in some degree must not obscure the fact that they are distinct and different orders.

1.46. When we speak of the physical order we mean by similarity of two events that they will produce the same effects in certain circumstances but not in others. Different physical events can evidently be similar to each other both in different degrees and also in different respects: two events may each be similar to a third but not be similar to each other. In other words, similarity is a non-transitive relation.

1.47. The same is true with regard to mental events. Two sensory qualities will be equal if their effects on other mental events or on behaviour will be the same in all respects. They may be similar in varying degrees and in different respects according as they will evoke the same other mental events or the same behaviour in certain circumstances but not in others.

1.48. It will now be clearer what we mean when we speak of the two orders of events, the physical23 and the phenomenal or mental order. Some events will occupy definite positions in both orders, but the relations between several such events in each of the two orders may be different. Some events in the physical order, such as electrical currents which we can only infer, will have no corresponding events in the phenomenal order; and some events in the phenomenal order, such as images or illusions which are not produced by external stimuli, will have no counterpart in the physical order. While there will thus be some degree of correspondence between the individual events which occur in the two orders, it will be but a very imperfect correspondence.

1.49. What we call ‘mind’ is thus a particular order of a set of events taking place in some organism and in some manner related to but not identical with, the physical order of events in the environment.24 The problem which the existence of mental phenomena raises is therefore how in a part of the physical order (namely an organism) a sub-system can be formed which in some sense (yet to be more fully defined) may be said to reflect some features of the physical order as a whole, and which thereby enables the organism which contains such a partial reproduction of the environmental order to behave appropriately towards its surroundings. The problem arises as much from the fact that the order of this sub-system is in some respects similar to, as from the fact that it is in other respects different from the corresponding more comprehensive physical order. The meaning of the conception of an ‘order’ will be further explained in the next chapter (2.28–2.30).

1.50. In recent physiological psychology these problems have received attention, mainly owing to the work of H. Klüver, under the headings of equivalence of stimuli and of sensory generalization. Klüver’s original statement of the problem is probably still the clearest exposition of it to be found in the literature.25 Merely another aspect of the same problem is the phenomenon of transfer of acquired responses from a given stimulus to others, which is of course the process through which phenomenal similarity manifests itself in behaviour. Yet, though the central character of this problem is now fairly generally recognized, it is usually mentioned merely to point out that it is ‘one of the most perplexing problems to be faced’26 or ‘the recognized stumbling block to all simple mechanical hypotheses of habit formation.’27

1.51. Equivalence, generalization and transfer are all instances of identity of the effects of different stimuli, while discrimination means a difference in the effect of individual stimuli or groups of stimuli. The qualitative order of the sensations which manifests itself in these phenomena is thus a difference in the order in which the stimuli in various combinations produce different effects; and sensory qualities can be regarded as groups or classes of events which, with respect to the responses of the organism, are identical, similar or different in their effects. The order of sensory qualities thus is identical with the totality of the differences of the effects which the different nervous impulses will produce in different circumstances. If we can explain the process which determines the differential responses of the organism to the various physical stimuli, we have at the same time also explained the qualitative order which is the peculiar characteristic of mental phenomena.

1.52. The significance of this statement, which in its bare form may sound more ‘behaviouristic’ than it is intended, will become clearer when we examine the kinds of different ‘effects’ which have to be considered in this connexion (2.23–2.26). At this point it need only be pointed out that by the term ‘effects’ we do not mean only, or even mainly, overt behaviour or peripheral responses, but shall include all the central nervous processes caused by the initial impulses, even though we may be able only indirectly to infer their existence.

1.53. Our problem is then to show how it is possible to build from the known elements of the nervous processes a structure of intermediate links between the physical stimuli and the overt responses which can account for the fact that the responses to different stimuli differ from each other in precisely that fashion in which we know the responses to the experienced sensory qualities to differ from each other. We must show that from the known physiological elements a structure can be formed which can differentiate between different impulses passing through it in exactly the same manner in which our sensory experience differentiates between the different stimuli.

1.54. Our problem must therefore be stated in terms of the relationships (of equality, similarity, difference, etc.) existing between the sensory qualities. It can be answered only by showing that a strictly equivalent system of relationships can exist between physiological events so that the effects of any event or any group of events in that system will produce a set of effects strictly corresponding to the effects the corresponding sensory qualities will produce. (The reader should observe already at this stage that this does not imply that any given physiological event will always produce the same effects irrespective of the other physiological events occurring at the same time. On this and on the general danger of a too narrow interpretation of the conception of a one-to-one correspondence between the sensory and the neural order see below 2.10–2.13.)

1.55. This contention implies that if we can explain how all the different sensory qualities differ from each other in the effects which they will produce whenever they occur, we have explained all there is to explain; or that the whole order of sensory qualities can be exhaustively described in terms of (or ‘consists of nothing but’) all the relationships existing between them.28 There is no problem of sensory qualities beyond the problem of how the different qualities differ from each other—and these differences can only consist of differences in the effects which they exercise in evoking other qualities, or in determining behaviour.





