5. THE CLASSIFICATION OF THE RELATIONS BETWEEN CLASSES


3.52. There is no reason why such connexions as we have been considering should be formed only between primary sensory impulses, i.e. between impulses arriving through afferent fibres at the higher centres; they can evidently be formed in a similar manner between the further impulses which are evoked by the former and which represent classes of them. Any impulse which occurs as part of the following of one or more other impulses will, on each occasion when it thus occurs, acquire or strengthen connexions with other impulses which form part of the same following. Connexions of this kind will therefore also be formed between impulses which as primary impulses rarely if ever occur at the same time, but which on different occasions have become connected with the same third impulse, in the following of which they have in consequence become included.

3.53. This acquisition of connexions between impulses in consequence of their simultaneous occurrence in a secondary or derived character is specially important in so far as those neurons in the cerebral cortex are concerned which are not directly served by sensory receptors but which appear to act solely as intermediaries between other sensory neurons or between sensory and motor neurons. Impulses in such neurons will occur, and in turn themselves acquire connexions, only in so far as they are part of the following of other impulses; but once they have acquired such a position in the system of connexions, they will in turn be able to acquire their own following and this will include impulses belonging to the following of all the different other primary impulses of which they form a part.

3.54. In the higher centres there occur undoubtedly a great many impulses which do not uniquely correspond to particular stimulations of sensory receptors but which represent merely common qualities attributed to the primary impulses; these representatives of classes of primary impulses will in turn become the objects of further processes of classification; the classes for which they stand will be further grouped into classes of classes, and this process can be repeated on many successive levels. We need, of course, not assume that these ‘levels’ are clearly separated or that the same impulse may not form part of the following of several other impulses which belong to different ‘levels’.

3.55. The process of classification which we are considering is therefore ‘multiple’ not only in the two senses which we have discussed before (2.39–2.43), but also in a third sense: it can take place on many successive levels or stages, and any one of the various classes in which an impulse may be included may in turn become the object of further classification. This third sense in which this process of classification may be multiple must not be confused with the second (2.41); the latter refers to the case where groups of simultaneously occurring impulses (a, b, c,), (e, f, g), (i, k, l), which, when they occur as groups, are as groups treated as members of the same class of groups. In the third sense multiple classification refers to the class A (of which individual impulses a, b, c, or groups of impulses (a, b, c), (e, f, g), etc. may be members) and the class B (of which the impulses m, n, o, or the groups of impulses (m, b, o), (p, q, r), etc. are members) and the similar class C, or rather to the ‘symbols’ representing the classes A, B, and C, which, by the common following they acquire, become members of a class of a higher order.

3.56. These different forms of multiple classification which it is necessary to distinguish conceptually, will, of course, occur in various combinations, and we obtain thus possibilities of classification of (or discrimination between) the different individual impulses and groups of impulses which are practically unlimited. The consequent differences in the influence which different impulses will exercise on the whole course of the nervous processes, varying from identity through various degrees of similarity to complete difference, would be adequate for building up an extremely complex system of relations among the millions of impulses.

3.57. The word classification scarcely conveys an adequate idea of the almost infinite wealth of variety and gradation of the discriminations which can be performed by such an apparatus. Since it is not merely a question of a particular impulse either belonging or not belonging to a particular class, but also of its belonging to it more or less ‘strongly’ (according as the connexions with the classifying impulses are ‘effective’ or merely ‘potential’, and therefore in the latter case requiring more or less support in order to become ‘effective’—3.24 and 3.37), it would be more appropriate to describe these complex processes by some such term as ‘evaluation’. We shall occasionally employ this latter term in the place of ‘classification’ in order to stress that the process is capable of making distinctions of degree as well as distinctions of kind.

3.58. The combination of the different kinds of multiple classification opens up the possibility of a still further organization of the order of the impulses, because through it the differences of the positions occupied in the whole system of classification by the impulses belonging to different classes may themselves become the object of classification and thereby acquire distinct qualities of their own.

3.59. It has been pointed out before (3.17) that it is a somewhat misleading and artificial approach to trace the effects of a single afferent impulse as if it ever occurred in isolation and as if its position were to be determined in an otherwise quiescent system; and that it is doubtful whether such a single isolated impulse, even if it ever occurred, could produce a sensory quality. It is probable that only groups of impulses as such can acquire that distinct position in the whole system which we call its quality. There exists, moreover, a good deal of physiological evidence which makes it probable that it is the so-called ‘gradients’ between different impulses rather than the individual impulses which are the significant features8. We must, therefore, consider more fully this case where not a single impulse but only certain groups of impulses as groups acquire a distinct following of their own (the second kind of multiple classification) and where in consequence the specific following determining a class of groups of impulses will be evoked only if the whole of a group belonging to this class occurs.

3.60. The constituents of a following that will appear only if certain impulses forming a group occur together must be connected with the individual impulses forming the group by what we have called ‘potential’ connexions. The simplest instance of such a position would be provided by several primary impulses which possess potential connexions with the same other secondary impulse which will be called forth only if all the primary impulses forming the group occur at the same time (or in rapid succession). Several different groups of such individual impulses may evidently thus become connected with the same symbolic impulse (or following of impulses) which will then stand for a class of such groups of impulses. And the symbolic or secondary impulse (or following of such impulse) which stands for any one of this class of groups of impulses (performing thus the second kind of multiple classification) may then (by the third, or relay type, of multiple classification) become itself a member of some new and higher class of impulses representing classes of groups of impulses. This higher class will then be represented by impulses which are symbols of classes of symbols, and so on.

3.61. As a result of such combinations of the different kinds of multiple classification it is evidently possible that the simultaneous occurrence of members of several different pairs (or groups) of different classes of impulses, will be classed as similar events or, we might say, as different events related similarly to each other. Since in such a case the same classifying impulse or impulses will be evoked by different pairs (or groups) of impulses which separately do not belong to the same class, it is legitimate to speak here of a classification of the difference (or relations) between classes of the first kind.

3.62. In order to bring out distinctly the meaning of such a classification of the difference (or relation) between different classes, it will be useful to consider the different meanings of the expressions ‘respond differently to different impulses’, ‘show the same difference in the response to different pairs of impulses’, and ‘respond to a difference between impulses’. In these expressions ‘respond’, of course, does not necessarily refer to any peripheral response of the organism but to the symbolic or classifying responses in the central nervous system. ‘To respond differently to different impulses’ then corresponds to what we have called simple classification. ‘To show the same difference in the response to impulses of different pairs which in other respects are classified as equal’ means that although, e.g., the impulses a and b in most respects belong to the same classes and similarly the impulses e and f also belong in most respects to the same other classes, there is at least one reaction which a and e and another which b and f have in common. ‘To react to a difference’, finally, means that any member of the class A occurring with any member of class B will produce the same response. If this same classifying response is also evoked by the occurrence of any member of class E together with any member of class F, and by the occurrence of any member of class K together with any member of class L, we can say that the differences or relations between the classes (or qualities) A and B, E and F, and K and L are the same.

3.63. The impulses which in this manner come to stand for, or to represent, particular classes of relations between other impulses will in turn also acquire their own following and thereby obtain their own distinct functional significance: the qualities represented by their common following would attach to the relations between the primary impulses rather than to those impulses themselves. Or, to express the same idea differently, the various kinds of relations between different impulses may themselves become differentiated from each other and thus become capable of forming the starting points of distinct chains of further impulses.

3.64. The relations between impulses or classes of impulses may thus be ordered as a system, or be classified, in the same way and by the same kind of process by which the individual impulses or groups of impulses are arranged in an order. It is in fact only at this point that, strictly speaking, we are entitled to speak of different relations between the impulses (see 1.56–1.61 and 2.20). It will now be seen how, as a result of the hierarchical organization of the connexions between different impulses, the one kind of ‘relation’ from which we started (namely the causal connexion between the impulses) can be used to build up complex structures with regard to which it is legitimate to speak of different kinds of relations existing between the various elements.

3.65. This process, by which the relations on which the classification of the primary impulses is based, become in turn the object of classificatory processes, can evidently be repeated on many levels. Not only relations between impulses, but relations between relations between impulses, and so forth, may all acquire their distinct following and in consequence become capable of forming the starting point for distinct further proesses.

3.66. The complexity of the order which can be built up by means of this variety of relations is for all practical purposes unlimited. Given the number of separate neurons in the higher nervous centres and the number of the possible connexions between them, the problem is not one of the limitation of the number of possible differences between their respective positions in the whole system, but rather the inadequacy of our mind to follow out the full degree of complexity of the order which can thus be determined. It seems indeed that any conceivable order or structure of relationships could be reproduced within such a system.

3.67. The differences in the functional significance or in the ‘quality’ which different groups of impulses may acquire as groups, and which may be independent of the functional significance which the individual impulses forming these groups possess if they occur singly, is thus a problem of the same character as that of the functional differentiation of the individual impulses, and can be answered by recourse to the same principle. But although the processes which bring about these differentiations are in principle independent of each other, and while it is even possible that only the classification of the groups and never that of individual impulses is the significant phenomenon, these classifications on different levels will, of course, interact with each other.

3.68. There will thus exist as much justification for saying that the capacity of the individual impulses to combine with others into groups possessing distinct functional significance will contribute to the distinct character which these impulses possess individually, as there is for saying that the latter will contribute to the distinctive following possessed by the group as group. Neither of these two aspects of what is a single process can in any sense be regarded as more fundamental. Both contribute in the same way to the organization of the whole system of sensory qualities; and it is the whole complex order thus produced which determines the characteristic position within this order of individual impulses as well as of groups of impulses.

3.69. The fact that chains of further processes (‘associations’) can be evoked not only by the ‘elementary’ sensory qualities (which were supposed to correspond to the occurrence of particular primary impulses), but also by certain ‘abstract’ attributes of different groups of sensations (such as figures, tunes, rhythms, or abstract concepts), has usually been regarded as an insurmountable obstacle to any physiological explanation of mental processes.9 For the approach followed here no such difficulty arises: the problem of the equivalence of ‘similar’ complexes of stimuli is not different in principle from the problem why the same associations should become attached to different impulses which correspond to the same ‘elementary’ qualities. The problem of equivalence in both these instances is basically the same and can be solved by the application of the same general principle of explanation.

3.70. Once a given impulse has acquired a definite following in common with other impulses, any new connexion which it acquires will become attached also to the impulses of its following and will be evoked, therefore, also by the other primary impulses with which it shares part of its following, although those other primary impulses may never have occurred at the same time with those others with which they become in this indirect manner associated. If all the different qualities which different impulses have in common are represented by certain symbolic impulses standing for these qualities and included in the following of all the impulses possessing that quality, there is no difficulty about the manner in which associations will become attached to such common qualities of different impulses rather than to the individual impulses. The phenomena of transfer and generalization of learning (1.50) are a direct consequence of the fact that identical mental attributes are represented by identical physiological impulses.





