2. PHENOMENALISM AND THE INCONSTANCY OF SENSORY QUALITIES


8.28. If the classification of events in the external world effected by our senses proves not to be a ‘true’ classification, i.e. not one which enables us adequately to describe the regularities in this world, and if the properties which our senses attribute to these events are not objective properties of these individual events, but merely attributes defining the classes to which our senses assign them, this means that we cannot regard the phenomenal world in any sense as more ‘real’ than the constructions of science: we must assume the existence of an objective world (or better, of an objective order of the events which we experience in their phenomenal order) towards the recognition of which the phenomenal order is merely a first approximation. The task of science is thus to try and approach ever more closely towards a reproduction of this objective order—a task which it can perform only by replacing the sensory order of events by a new and different classification.3

8.29. By saying that there ‘exists’ an ‘objective’ world different from the phenomenal world we are merely stating that it is possible to construct an order or classification of events which is different from that which our senses show us and which enables us to give a more consistent account of the behaviour of the different events in that world. Or, in other words, it means that our knowledge of the phenomenal world raises problems which can be answered only by altering the picture which our senses give us of that world, i.e. by altering our classification of the elements of which it consists. That this is possible and necessary is, in fact, a postulate which underlies all our efforts to arrive at a scientific explanation of the world.

8.30. Any purely phenomenalistic interpretation of the task of science, or any attempt to reduce this task to merely a complete description of the phenomenal world, thus must break down because our senses do not effect such a classification of the different events that what appears to us as alike will also always behave in the same manner. The basic thesis of phenomenalism (and positivism) that ‘all phenomena are subject to invariable laws’ is simply not true if the term phenomenon is taken in its strict meaning of things as they appear to us.

8.31. The ideal of science as merely a complete description of phenomena, which is the positivist conclusion derived from the phenomenalistic approach, therefore proves to be impossible. Science consists rather in a constant search for new classes, for ‘constructs’ which are so defined that general propositions about the behaviour of their elements are universally and necessarily true. For this purpose these classes cannot be defined in terms of sensory properties of the particular individual events perceived by the individual person; they must be defined in terms of their relations to other individual events.

8.32. Such a definition of any class of events, in terms of their relations to other classes of events instead of in terms of any sensory properties which they individually possess, cannot be confined to the former, or even to all the events which together constitute the complete situation existing at a particular moment. The events referred to in the definition of those with which we have actually to deal have to be defined in a similar purely ‘relational’ manner. The ultimate aim of this procedure must be to define all classes of events exclusively in terms of their relations to each other and without any reference to their sensory properties. It has been well said that ‘for science an object expresses itself in the totality of relations possible between it and other objects.’4 We have already seen (8.24–8.25) that such a complete system of explanation would necessarily be tautological, because all that could be predicted by it would necessarily follow from the definitions of the objects to which it referred.

8.33. If the theory outlined here is correct, there exists an even more fundamental objection to any consistently phenomenalist interpretation of science. It would appear that not only are the events of the world, if defined in terms of their sensory attributes, not subject to invariable laws, so that situations presenting the same appearance to our senses may produce different results; but also that the phenomenal world (or the order of the sensory qualities from which it is built up) is itself not constant but variable, and that it will in some measure change its appearance as a result of that very process of reclassification which we must perform in order to explain it.

8.34. If it is true, as we have argued, that the ‘higher’ mental activities are merely a repetition at successive levels of processes of classification of essentially the same character as those by which the different sensory qualities have come to be distinguished in the first instance, it would seem almost inevitable that this process of reclassification will in some measure also affect the distinctions between the different sensory qualities from which it starts. The nature of the process by which the difference between sensory qualities are determined makes it probable that they will remain variable and that the distinctions between them will be modified by new experiences. This would mean that the phenomenal world itself would not be constant but would be incessantly changing in a direction to a closer reproduction of the relations existing in the physical world. If in the course of this process the sensory data themselves alter their character, the ideal of a purely descriptive science becomes altogether impossible.

8.35. That the sensory qualities which attach to particular physical events are thus in principle themselves variable5 is no less important even though we must probably regard them as relatively stable compared with the continuous changes of the scheme of classification in terms of which abstract thought proceeds, almost certainly in so far as the course of the life of the individual is concerned. But we should still have to consider more seriously than we are wont to do, what is amply confirmed by ordinary experience, namely that as a result of the advance of our explanation of the world we also come to ‘see’ this world differently, i.e. that we not merely recognize new laws which connect the given phenomena, but that these events are themselves likely to change their appearance to us.

8.36. Such variations of the sensory qualities attributed to given events could, of course, never be ascertained by direct comparisons of past and present sensations, since the memory images of past sensations would be subject to the same changes as the current sensations. The only possibility of testing this conclusion would be provided by experiments with discrimination such as have been suggested in the preceding chapter (7.38–7.51).

8.37. It deserves, perhaps, to be mentioned that, although the theory developed here was suggested in the first instance by the psychological views which Ernst Mach has outlined in his Analysis of Sensations and elsewhere, its systematic development leads to a refutation of his and similar phenomenalist philosophies: by destroying the conception of elementary and constant sensations as ultimate constituents of the world, it restores the necessity of a belief in an objective physical world which is different from that presented to us by our senses.6

8.38. Similar considerations apply to the views expounded on these matters by William James, John Dewey and the American realists and developed by Bertrand Russell. The latter’s view according to which ‘the stuff of the world’ consists of ‘innumerable transient particulars’ such as a patch of colour which is ‘both physical and psychical’ in fact is explicitly based on the assumption that ‘sensations are what is common to the mental and the physical world’, and that their essence is ‘their independence from past experience’. The whole of this ‘neutral monism’ seems to be based on entirely untenable psychological conceptions.7

8.39. Another interesting consequence following from our theory is that a stimulus whose occurrence in conjunction with other stimuli showed no regularities whatever could never be perceived by our senses (6.36). This would seem to mean that we can know only such kinds of events as show a certain degree of regularity in their occurrence in relations with others, and that we could not know anything about events which occurred in a completely irregular manner. The fact that the world which we know seems wholly an orderly world may thus be merely a result of the method by which we perceive it. Everything which we can perceive we perceive necessarily as an element of a class of events which obey certain regularities. There could be in this sense no class of events showing no regularities, because there would be nothing which could constitute them for us into a distinct class.





