5. THE UNITARY CHARACTER OF THE SENSORY ORDER


1.56. The conclusion to which we have been led means that the order of sensory qualities no less than the order of physical events is a relational order—even though to us, whose mind is the totality of the relations constituting that order, it may not appear as such. The difference between the physical order of events and the phenomenal order in which we perceive the same events is thus not that only the former is purely relational, but that the relations existing between corresponding events and groups of events in the two orders will be different.

1.57. The order of the sensory qualities is difficult to describe, not only because we are not explicitly aware of the relations between the different qualities but merely manifest these relations in the discriminations which we perform,29 and because the number and complexity of these relations is probably greater than anything which we could ever explicitly state or exhaustively describe, but also because, as we shall see, it is not a stable but a variable order. Yet we must attempt here to describe at least certain general characteristics of that order, because our problem is whether we can account for at least the kind of properties which it possesses, even if we cannot explain its detailed arrangement.

1.58. One main point about this order is that, in spite of its division into the different modalities, it is still a unitary order, in the sense that any two events belonging to it may in certain definite ways resemble each other or differ from each other. Any colour and any smell, any tone and any temperature, or any tactual sensation such as smoothness or wetness and any experience of shape or rhythm may yet have something in common, or be at least in some sense akin to or in contrast with one another. Experiments have shown that these experienced similarities extend much further than we are usually aware of and that, e.g., even a person who at first thinks such an attempt nonsense, has no difficulty, once he can bring himself to try, to find a tone whose brightness is the same as that of the smell of lilac.30

1.59. Some qualities, especially those which, like colours or tones, are connected into qualitative continua and which, since Helmholtz, we describe as forming distinct modalities, probably always seem to belong more closely together than others such as, e.g., the sensations of pressure, pain, and temperature, which used to be regarded as belonging to the one sense of touch but do not form one modality in the sense just defined. But when we try to describe the differences between different qualities belonging to the same modality, such as different colours, we find that in order to do so we usually resort to expressions borrowed from other modalities. One colour may be warmer or heavier or louder than another, one tone brighter or rougher or thicker than another. This indicates that, though in some respects one particular colour or one particular tone may be most closely related to other colours or other tones respectively, yet in other respects they may be closer to qualities belonging to different modalities.

1.60. Although within any given modality qualities vary continuously31 they need not vary in a constant direction or dimension. While it is true of tones that if one tone is higher than a second, and a third higher than the first, the third will also be higher than the second, we cannot similarly say that, because orange is yellower than red and green bluer than orange, green is therefore either more yellow or more blue than red. While, with regard to pitch, tones can be arranged in one linear scale, colours do not, in this sense, vary in a single direction.

1.61. It makes sense, on the other hand, to say that two different colours differ in the same manner in which two different temperatures or weights do, or that two tones differ similarly as do two sensations of colour or touch. This means that qualities of different modalities may vary along similar or parallel directions or dimensions, or that the same kind of differences can occur in different modalities. It is, e.g., part of the difference between blue and red that blue is associated with coolness and red with warmth. There exist apparently certain intermodal or intersensory attributes, and with regard to some of the terms which we use for them, such as strong or weak, mild or mellow, tingling or sharp, we are often not immediately aware to which sense modality they originally belong.32

1.62. In our highly developed conscious picture of the sensory order these intersensory and intermodal relations are not very prominent and with the development of conceptual thought and particularly, as a result of the great influence which sensualism has had on it, in scientific thought, they are more and more driven back until they are almost completely disregarded.33 We may become aware of their existence only when we attempt to describe a particular sensory quality and in doing so find ourselves driven to describe a colour as soft or sweet, a tone as thin or dark, a taste as hot or sharp, or a smell as dry and sweet. There can be little doubt that these seemingly metaphorical expressions refer to truly intersensory attributes; and experimental tests have at least in some instances shown that different people tend to equate the same pairs or groups of different qualities.34

1.63. These facts may also be described by saying that relations between different qualities may in turn also possess distinct qualities, and that the relations between different pairs or groups of qualities belonging to different modalities may possess the same qualities. These qualities attaching to the relations between different qualities may in turn be similar to individual sensory qualities. The successive musical intervals from the second to the octave, e.g., have been described as ‘gritty’, ‘mellow’, ‘coarse’, ‘hollow’, ‘luscious’, ‘astringent’, and ‘smooth’ respectively.35

1.64. These intermodal relations may occasionally be so strong that different sensations belonging to one modality may regularly be accompanied by the experience of qualities belonging to another modality, as in the case of colour-hearing and other instances of synaesthesia. There is some evidence that these synaesthetic modes of perception are particularly strong in relatively early stages of mental development, and that our habit of thinking of particular colours as primarily belonging to the range of colours, or of a tone primarily as being one of a range of tones, is the produce of a comparatively late and abstract attitude.36

1.65. More familiar than the facts of synaesthesia is the fact that most sensory qualities are closely associated with certain affective tones and that there exists thus a close connexion between the order of sensory qualities and that of affective qualities. The emotional values attaching to various sensory qualities are well known, and there are indeed few sensory qualities which we do not regard at least as either pleasant or unpleasant, or as simply good or bad. The general relation between sensations and emotions or drives will, however, have to be considered later and cannot be further examined at this point.

1.66. The relations or connexions between different sensory (and affective) qualities find expression in the expectations which their occurrence arouses. A red colour does not merely evoke the image of warmth but we shall be rather surprised if a red objects turns out to be very cold; and a certain smell will not only conjure up certain tastes but we shall be shocked if a deliciously smelling fruit turns out to have a vile taste. In this way certain groups of qualities tend to ‘belong’ together, and particular qualities come to ‘mean’ to us certain other qualities.

1.67. Whether the facts briefly summarized in this section do or do not justify the assertion of a ‘Unity of the Senses’ in such a manner that ‘all senses are alike in respect to their attributive dimensions’,37 they probably entitle us to say that, directly or indirectly, all mental qualities are so related to each other that any attempt to give an exhaustive description of any one of them would make it necessary to describe the relations existing between all.





