7. CONCEPTUAL THOUGHT


6.44. We have seen that the classification of the stimuli performed by our senses will be based on a system of acquired connexions which reproduce, in a partial and imperfect manner, relations existing between the corresponding physical stimuli. The ‘model’ of the physical world which is thus formed will give only a very distorted reproduction of the relationships existing in that world (5.20–5.24); and the classification of these events by our senses will often prove to be false, that is, give rise to expectations which will not be borne out by events.

6.45. But, although the conscious mind can know of the external world only in terms of the classes which earlier experience has created, and although all its conscious experience must always refer to elements of such given classes rather than to individual objects, the experience of these data of consciousness will provide the foundation for a revision of the classification from which it starts. Further experience will show that parts of different situations which our senses represent as being alike will, according to the different accompanying circumstances, have to be treated as different. The mind will perform on the initial sensory experiences a process of reclassification, the object of which are no longer the original stimuli but the elements of the classes formed by the preconscious sensory mechanism.

6.46. The experience that objects which individually appear as alike to our sense will not always behave in the same manner in relation to other classes of apparently similar objects, and that objects which to our senses appear to be different may in all other respects prove to behave in the same manner, will thus lead to the formation of new classes which will be determined by explicitly (consciously) known relations between their respective elements. These new classes formed by a rearrangement of the objects of the sensory world are what are usually described as abstract concepts.

6.47. The formation of abstract concepts thus constitutes a repetition on a higher level of the same kind of process of classification by which the differences between the sensory qualities are determined.12 This continuous process of reclassification is forced on us because we find that the classification of objects and events which our senses effect is only a rough and imperfect approximation to a reproduction of the differences between the physical objects which would enable us correctly to predict their behaviour13—an approximation determined by the accidents of evolution, the physiological capacities and the pragmatic needs of the individual and the species.

6.48. Perhaps we may go still further and regard conceptual thought and the processes of inference as a further repetition of the process of classification on a still higher level. It is probably no accident that the formation of classes and the relation between classes were first studied in the attempt to analyse the principles of conceptual reasoning. It should be clear now that the same kind of relationship which in logic has been developed as the theory of classes and relations, is immediately applicable to that physiological process of multiple grouping or classification which we have been examining. And it should not be difficult to conceive of the conscious mental process which logic analyses as a repetition on a higher level of similar processes which, on a pre-conscious level, have produced the material on which the conscious processes operate.

6.49. We cannot attempt here further to distinguish the different levels on which this kind of process of constantly repeated classifications proceeds, and we must be content with the suggestion that all the ‘higher’ mental processes may be interpreted as being determined by the operation of the same general principle which we have employed to explain the formation of the system of basic sensory qualities. We have throughout to deal with an ever-repeated process of classification of the kind described earlier.

6.50. With this suggestion of the essential unity of the character of the physiological mechanism underlying all kinds of mental processes we have concluded the exposition of the theory which is the main object of this study. There remain yet, however, two complementary tasks to which the two concluding chapters will be devoted. We shall first consider what kind of empirical confirmation or refutation we may hope to find for our theory. The final chapter will examine certain philosophical consequences which would follow from this theory and which are closely connected with certain topics merely touched upon in this and the preceding chapters.





