6. ‘CONCRETE’ AND ‘ABSTRACT


6.33. While the ‘consciousness’ of consciously experienced qualities implies their being closely related to each other, the relationships which determine these qualities are not in turn themselves conscious. These relationships determine how different conscious experiences will act upon or affect each other, but they are present in consciousness only in this ‘implicit’ manner and are not explicitly experienced.

6.34. Since the relations which determine the character of mental qualities are not themselves consciously experienced but show themselves solely in the different effects which the different experienced qualities produce, the latter appear to us as the absolute and irreducible data of consciousness. This is often expressed by the statement that sensory experience gives us acquaintance with the ‘concrete’ phenomena while the higher mental processes derive ‘abstractions’ from those immediate data.

6.35. This distinction between the ‘concrete’ character of immediate experience and the ‘abstract’ character of ‘concepts’ is misleading in several respects. It is closely connected with the old belief that the sensory qualities constitute in some sense a reproduction of corresponding attributes of the objects of the external world, and with that mosaic theory of perception which conceives of all mental events as being built up from fixed sensory ‘elements’.

6.36. If sensory perception must be regarded as an act of classification, what we perceive can never be unique properties of individual objects but always only properties which the objects have in common with other objects. Perception is thus always an interpretation, the placing of something into one or several classes of objects. An event of an entirely new kind which has never occurred before, and which sets up impulses which arrive in the brain for the first time, could not be perceived at all.8

6.37. All we can perceive of external events are therefore only such properties of these events as they possess as members of classes which have been formed by past ‘linkages’. The qualities which we attribute to the experienced objects are strictly speaking not properties of that object at all, but a set of relations by which our nervous system classifies them9 or, to put it differently, all we know about the world is of the nature of theories and all ‘experience’ can do is to change these theories.10

6.38. This means also that what we perceive of the external world are never either all the properties which particular objects can be said to possess objectively, nor even only some of the properties which these objects in fact do possess physically, but always only certain ‘aspects’, relations to other kinds of objects which we assign to all elements of the classes in which we place the perceived objects. This may often comprise relations which objectively do not at all belong to the particular object, but which we merely ascribe to it as the member of the class in which we place it as a result of some accidental collocation of circumstances in the past.

6.39. In any sense in which we can contrast our knowledge of the perceived properties of an external object with its physical or objective properties, all sensory perception is therefore in a sense ‘abstract’; it always selects certain features or aspects of a given situation. We shall presently see that the assumption that there exists a physical world different from the phenomenal world involves the assumption that the former possesses properties which we cannot directly perceive, and even some which we do not know. Even the so-called elementary sensory qualities are in this sense ‘abstractions’, since they are determined by bundles of relationships which we have learnt to attach to certain stimuli which in a physical sense may or may not possess identical properties.

6.40. We already have stressed repeatedly the fact that the immediate data of consciousness are not in fact built up in mosaic fashion from elementary sensations. We perceive directly such complexes as configurations (gestalts), and there can be little doubt that we often consciously perceive only the gestalt qualities without being aware of the ‘elementary’ sensations (such as colours) of which the former were once supposed to be built up.11 It is at least probable that even on a pre-conscious level we can learn to respond similarly to certain ‘abstract’ features of an external situation irrespective of the different elements of which the gestalt may be built up in the particular case.

6.41. The immediate data of consciousness will therefore be ‘abstract’ not only in the sense that they can never convey to us more than certain generic ‘attributes’ of the perceived objects, but also in the sense that they will always reflect only some of these generic properties which might be ascribed to the perceived object. If, with regard to current perceptions, we are usually little aware of their partial or incomplete character, this is probably due to the fact that while the experience is present we are in a position to supplement it by directing our attention to particular features.

6.42. This possibility of ‘filling in’ at first unperceived details by directing our attention to them probably constitutes also one of the main differences between current perceptions and memory images. (Though some people of the eidetic type appear to be able by recalling vivid images to discover details in them which they had not noticed at the time of the original experience). But the memory images need not always to be more ‘abstract’ than current perceptions. If frequently only certain abstract features of a perceived situation can be remembered, this is maybe a consequence of the fact that only those abstract features were perceived in the first instance.

6.43. While there thus exists little justification for any sharp distinction between the ‘concrete’ picture supplied by sense perception and the ‘abstractions’ which are derived from the former by the higher mental processes (or between the complete picture of a unique situation built up by the ‘senses’ from fixed elements, and the abstract features which the ‘intellect’ singles out from the picture which is supposed to be given prior to any abstraction, cf. 5.19), there is a legitimate sense in which we can at any moment distinguish between the immediate data of consciousness and the further processes of rearrangement and reclassification to which they can be subjected on a conscious level.





