8. THE ‘ABSOLUTE’ QUALITIES OF SENSATIONS A PHANTOM-PROBLEM


1.90. A different type of objection to our manner of stating the problem must be expected from a school of thought which, though not formally organized, is fairly widespread and which in some respects might be regarded as the extreme opposite of behaviourism. It would probably be contended by representatives of this point of view that, even if we succeeded in accounting for all the differences between the effects of the different stimuli or impulses, there would still remain an unexplained factor, the ‘absolute’ or ‘intrinsic’ qualities of the sensations which are not exhausted by all the differences in their effects but which must be experienced to be known.

1.91. This conception of the absolute character of sensory qualities derives probably from John Locke’s conception of ‘simple’ ideas. It has found an explicit defender in no less a student than William James.47 It is a contention which raises what to us seems clearly a phantom-problem which cannot even be clearly stated and with regard to which it is impossible to say what kind of statement would provide an answer. It is nevertheless important, not only because of the pervasive influence of this conception, but also because it is probably one of the main roots of the belief in a peculiar mental substance.

1.92. The first point to note is that it is clearly possible that a sense discrimination of which some other person is capable can raise a problem for us though we ourselves may not be capable of it. The problem of colour vision, e.g., can clearly become a problem to the totally colour-blind person as much as it can to us. What we shall have to show is that there are no questions which we can intelligibly ask about sensory qualities which could not also conceivably become a problem to a person who has not himself experienced the particular qualities but knows of them only from the descriptions given to him by others. In other words, that nothing can become a problem about sensory qualities which cannot in principle also be described in words; and such a description in words will always have to be a description in terms of the relation of the quality in question to other sensory qualities.

1.93. Most people will agree that the question of whether the sensory qualities which one person experiences are exactly the same as those which another person experiences is, in the absolute sense in which it is sometimes asked, an unanswerable and strictly meaningless question. All we can ever discuss is whether for different persons different sensory qualities differ in the same way. To establish whether a person is colour-blind we have to find out, not how ‘red’ looks to him in any absolute sense, but whether and how it differs from various other shades of ‘red’ and from ‘green.’ In all such instances we can find out and know only whether, compared with other people, a person discriminates between given stimuli in the same or in a different manner.

1.94. In other words, all that can be communicated are the differences between sensory qualities, and only what can be communicated can be discussed. Such communication does not imply that the qualities perceived by different people are similar in any absolute sense. The problem which is raised, for instance, by the much greater capacity for pitch discrimination possessed by the experienced musician but not by ordinary persons is not fundamentally different from the problem created by the distinctions between the qualities which most of us experience.

1.95. It is instructive briefly to consider how we should proceed if we were to try to give a congenitally blind person an idea of sight and colour. We should probably base our account in the first instance on the fact that the blind is familiar with three-dimensional space, with shape and movement, and attempt to explain to him that, as he can feel radiant heat or sound emitted by a distant source, so the eye enables us to perceive other qualities at a distance. We should then try to explain that these qualities with which he is unfamiliar will vary not only along a single dimension, as temperature does from cold to hot, but that it can also vary like tones from bright to dark, from loud to soft, from sharp to blunt and from pleasant to unpleasant. We shall point out to him that in groups these qualities can form harmonies or may clash as tones do, and so on.

1.96. How far we could get in thus teaching a congenitally blind the relative values of the different colours has never been systematically tested, largely because the required description of the order of those sense qualities in terms of their common dimensions (1.62–1.67) has not been systematically developed and because we therefore lack the necessary words. That blind persons can at least learn to use the names of colours so that a person who does not know that they are blind may remain unaware of it in hearing their descriptions is shown by the writings of Miss Helen Keller and others. Today, with our greater familiarity of the phenomenon of synaesthesia, it also no longer seems so absurd, as it seemed to John Locke, that the ‘studious blind man’ who thought that he had discovered what scarlet looked like, described it as ‘like the sound of a trumpet.’48

1.97. An illustration given in a recent book may be quoted at length, as its concluding passage raises our problem in a particularly clear manner:

‘The approach of a scientist to the phenomena which he observes may be realized perhaps by means of an analogy. Suppose you enter a room and see a man playing a violin. You say at once that this is a musical instrument and is producing sound. But suppose that the observer were absolutely deaf from birth, had no idea of hearing, and had never been told anything of sound or musical instruments, his whole knowledge of the world having been acquired through senses other than hearing. This deaf observer entering the room where a violinist was playing would be entirely unable to account for the phenomenon. He would see the movements of the player, the operation of the bow on the strings, the peculiarly shaped instrument, but the whole thing would appear to him irrational. But if he were a scientist interested in phenomena and their classification, he would presently find that the movements of the bow on the violin produced vibrations, and these vibrations could be detected by means of physical instruments and their wave form could be observed. After some time, it might occur to him that the vibrations of the strings and violin must be communicated to the air and could be observed as changes of pressure. Then he could record the changes of pressure produced in the air in the playing of a piece of music, and by analysing the record could observe that the same groups of pressure changes were repeated periodically. Eventually he would attain to a knowledge of the whole phenomenon of music—the form of musical composition and the nature of different musical forms—but none of this would give him any approach to the absolute truth in that he would still be unaware of the existence of sound as a sense and of the part that music could play in the mental life of those who could hear.’49

1.98. Except for the last sentence this passage provides an excellent illustration of the distinction we have drawn between the physical and the phenomenal order of events. The last sentence, however, raises two difficulties (apart from the fact that the author speaks of the ‘phenomenon’ of music where he refers to what we would describe as its physical equivalent). In the first instance the impression which this sentence conveys, that a ‘knowledge of the whole phenomenon of music’ can be attained without at the same time attaining some knowledge not only of the physical but also of the sensory attributes of these events is somewhat misleading. A reconstruction of the theory of music in the manner suggested would involve a study not only of the ‘objective’ attributes of sound but also a study of the manner in which the people producing the music deal with it. It would, e.g., have to include the discovery that for the musicians the continuum of sound waves of different frequencies was divided into discrete steps, so that all the waves belonging to certain narrow intervals were treated as alike or indistinguishable, while wave-lengths of intermediate intervals would not be employed at all; further, that of the distinct musical notes thus determined some were treated as resembling each other and some as being related in other ways, that certain combinations of notes were preferred to others, and that certain successions of notes were in some respects treated as equivalents of other such successions, etc., etc.

1.99. The theory of music thus constructed would therefore not really refer to the relations between physical events or to relations between them defined according to the similarity or difference of their action on other physical events, but to elements defined in terms of their similarity or dissimilarity to the persons who wrote, played, or heard the music. It would be a theory, not about the objective (experimentally tested) relations between the different physical events, but about what these events meant to the persons concerned with music.

1.100. The second problem arising from the concluding sentence of the passage quoted is contained in the suggestion that there is an ‘absolute truth’, an absolute quality of sound as a sensory experience, which must forever remain inaccessible to the deaf from birth. The term ‘absolute’ used in this connexion unquestionably refers to some significant aspects of sensory experience. What we are denying is not that sensory qualities may possess attributes which those who cannot hear cannot learn about, but that whatever incommunicable attributes sensory qualities may possess can ever raise a scientific problem.

1.101. One fact which is probably referred to by the use of the term ‘absolute’ in this connexion is that, however far we may go in describing or explaining differences between sensory qualities, there will always remain some further differences which have not yet been enumerated. This is closely connected with a circumstance which we shall have to consider later, namely that, because of constitutional limitations of our mind, we shall never be able to achieve more than an explanation of the principle on which mind operates, and shall never succeed in fully explaining any particular mental act. But the fact that the differences between the different sensory qualities are too numerous and varied for us ever to be able to state them all, does not mean that any one of these differences should not be capable of becoming a problem to which, at least in principle, we may provide an answer.

1.102. It is merely another aspect of the same problem if it is pointed out that the immediate experience of a group of sensory qualities (say a number of sounds and colours) will always convey more to us (will involve a large number of implied distinctions among themselves and from other possible experiences) than any possible description can convey. In other words: the congenitally blind or deaf can never learn all that which the seeing or hearing person owes to the direct experience of the sensory qualities in question, because no description can exhaust all the distinctions which are experienced. This, however, does not mean that there is more than differences from other qualities, and still less that any such ‘absolute’ character of the qualities can raise a genuine problem.

1.103. It seems thus impossible that any question about the nature or character of particular sensory qualities should ever arise which is not a question about the differences from (or the relations to) other sensory qualities; and the extent to which the effects of its occurrence differ from the effects of the occurrence of any other qualities determines the whole of its character.

1.104. To ask beyond this for the explanation of some absolute attribute of sensory qualities seems to be to ask for something which by definition cannot manifest itself in any differences in the consequences which will follow because this rather than any other quality has occurred. Such a factor, however, could by definition not be of relevance to any scientific problem. The ‘absolute’ quality seems to be unexplainable because there is nothing to explain, because absolute, if it has any meaning at all, can only mean that the attribute which is so described has no scientific significance.

1.105. The contention that all the attributes of sensory qualities (and of other mental qualities) are relations to other such qualities, and that the totality of all these relations between mental qualities exhausts all there is to be said about the mental order, corresponds of course, (perhaps we should say follows from) the conception of mind itself as an order of events. And with the recognition that mind itself, and all the attributes of mental events, are a complex of relations, there disappears of course the need for any peculiar kind of things which by themselves have attributes which constitute them a peculiar ‘substance’.

1.106. The abandonment of the phantom-problem of the absolute character of mental qualities, and the recognition of the relative significance of these attributes, is of fundamental importance, because it opens, as we shall see, the way for a general application of a principle which has long been used to explain those attributes of sensory experience which had been recognized to be relative, such as spatial position.

1.107. It also follows from the relative character of all mental qualities that any discussion of these qualities in terms of their relations to each other must necessarily remain within the realm of mental events: it can never provide a bridge which leads from them to physical events. In the next chapter we shall attempt to show how this circle can be broken.





