1. AN INVENTORY OF THE PHYSIOLOGICAL DATA


3.1. Before we can attempt to state in greater detail the theory sketched in the preceding chapter, it will be necessary to take stock of the essential anatomical and physiological facts which we shall have to use as bricks from which to construct an apparatus of the kind we are seeking. For our purpose it will not be necessary to concern ourselves with the structure and the functioning of the central nervous system in any great detail. It will suffice if we briefly note certain general characteristics of its parts and of the processes taking place in them. The simplifications which we shall employ must be justified by the fact that our aim is not so much to elaborate a theory which is correct in every detail, as to show how any theory of this kind can account for the mental events with which we are concerned.

3.2. According to an almost universally held view the nervous system is built up, like the rest of the organism, from a large number of separate cells. These cells, called neurons, consist of a cell body and two kinds of attaching processes, the axon and the dendrites. Although some doubt has recently been expressed concerning this ‘neuron theory’, and the alternative theory of an essential continuity of the system of nervous fibres has been put forward,1 we shall state the main facts in terms of the predominant view, since confirmation of the alternative theory would not significantly affect the conclusions at which we arrive from the former. The main facts which we shall have to take into account may then be stated as follows:

3.3. The cerebral cortex is the highest and most complex of several ‘bridges’ which connect the afferent fibres conducting impulses from the peripheral receptors, and the efferent fibres conducting impulses to the motor organs. We must thus conceive of the central nervous system (and probably also of the cortex itself) as a hierarchy consisting of many superimposed levels of connexions, all of which may be concerned in the transmission of impulses from the afferent (sensory) to the efferent (motor) fibres. This conception of a hierarchy of centres or levels does, of course, not imply that these levels can always be sharply separated, either structurally or functionally, or that they are superimposed upon each other in a simple linear order.

3.4. The number of separate nerve cells within these centres by far exceeds the number of afferent fibres conducting impulses to them and of the efferent fibres conducting impulses from them. The cerebral cortex alone has been estimated to contain about ten thousand million separate cells while the number of afferent and efferent fibres is of the order of magnitude of a few millions only. The number of distinct afferent fibres reaching the cortex is also considerably lower than the number of distinct sensory receptors which are the source of the impulses reaching the brain through these fibres.

3.5. While the peripheral receptor organs in which the impulses are set up by stimuli are in general sensitive only to a limited range of stimuli, the impulses themselves which are conducted to the nervous centres are of uniform character and do not differ from each other in quality. There is no known correspondence between any attributes of the individual impulse and either the attributes of the stimulus which caused it or the attributes of the sensory quality which it evokes (1.31–1.37).

3.6. The impulse or state of excitation conducted by any nervous fibre is not a continuous flow but rather a succession of shocks following each other at very short intervals and usually described as a ‘train’ (or incorrectly as a ‘volley’) of impulses.

3.7. Each fibre will normally conduct impulses only in one direction, although it seems probable that the fibre itself is capable of transmitting impulses in either direction and that it is its position with respect to the body of the cell, and the position of the whole neuron in the chain of neurons, which determines in which direction the impulses will normally travel through a fibre.

3.8. The impulses conducted by the nerve fibres obey the ‘all-or-nothing principle’ which states that any given fibre may only either transmit or not transmit a given impulse, but that, if it does transmit it, the impulse will always be of the same strength. This means that we have throughout to deal with a kind of ‘trigger phenomenon’ where what is loosely called a ‘transmission’ of impulses does not really mean a conduction of energy but rather that one impulse releases energy stored up in the next cell in the chain.

3.9. The ‘strength’ of the impulse, which shows itself in its capacity to cause excitation in other neurons, however, will differ not only between different fibres but also between different segments and branches of the same fibre roughly in proportion to their thickness. But while the impulse conducted by a given fibre cannot vary in strength, it may vary in duration (or rather in the number of successive shocks of which the train of impulses is made up), and this variation in duration will in some respects operate similarly to a variation in strength (see 3.13 below).

3.10. In addition to the impulses transmitting excitation some nerve fibres appear to conduct another kind of impulses which quell or inhibit excitation.

3.11. At certain points called ‘synapses’ nervous impulses are transmitted from one neuron to another. Any theory that is to account for the known action of the central nervous system must assume that these ‘synapses’ are not permanent or invariable features of the nervous system but can be created and modified in the course of its operation, probably as a result of the simultaneous occurrence of impulses in two or more adjoining neurons. As has already been pointed out (2.47), we possess practically no knowledge about the nature of these synapses or the mechanism by which they are created. It is not even clear whether we ought to conceive of the creation of a new synapse as a change in the anatomical structure, which is the interpretation commonly given to the ‘formation of a new path’,2 or whether it is brought about by a functional change, such as the establishment of the kind of permanent circular flow of impulses mentioned before. In so far as connexions of this kind must be assumed to transmit not excitation but inhibition, there does not appear to exist even a plausible hypothesis about the conditions under which such new connexions would be established, comparable to the rôle attributed to the simultaneity of the impulses for the formation of connexions between excitatory impulses.

3.12. The assumption that connexions or synapses between neurons are created as the result of the simultaneous excitation of these neurons implies the further assumption that these connexions will be two-way connexions, i.e., that, if an impulse in a given neuron is regularly transmitted to a certain other neuron, an impulse in this second neuron will also be regularly transmitted to the first. This assumption is independent of the question whether the transmission in the two opposite directions is effected by the same channel or whether separate channels capable of transmitting impulses in opposite directions are created by the same circumstances.

3.13. The operation of the ‘all-or-nothing principle’ is partly modified by the phenomenon of ‘summation’ which appears to operate in two ways, spatially and temporally: either impulses arriving simultaneously at a given cell through different fibres, although each of them individually may be too weak to cause excitation of that cell, may yet together produce that result; or the succession of shocks contained in a train of impulses in a single fibre may build up sufficient strength to cause excitation to the cell to which they are conducted, although a single shock or a few shocks would not have been sufficient to do so.

3.14. It seems that in many instances the stimulation of more than one individual receptor organ and sometimes perhaps the stimulation of receptor organs of several different kinds, and consequently the arrival of impulses through a number of different afferent fibres, is required in order that a sensation of a particular quality should be produced.3





