6. THE LIMITS OF EXPLANATION


8.66. It is by no means always and necessarily true that the achievement of an explanation of the principle on which the phenomena of a certain class operate enables us to proceed to explanations of the more concrete detail. There are several fields in which practical difficulties prevent us from thus elaborating known explanations of the principle to the point where they would enable us to predict particular events. This is often the case when the phenomena are very complex, as in meteorology or biology; in these instances, the number of variables which would have to be taken into account is greater than that which can be ascertained or effectively manipulated by the human mind. While we may, e.g., possess full theoretical knowledge of the mechanism by which waves are formed and propagated on the surface of water, we shall probably never be able to predict the shape and movements of the wave that will form on the ocean at a particular place and moment of time.

8.67. Apart from these practical limits to explanation, which we may hope continuously to push further back, there also exists, however, an absolute limit to what the human brain can ever accomplish by way of explanation—a limit which is determined by the nature of the instrument of explanation itself, and which is particularly relevant to any attempt to explain particular mental processes.

8.68. If our account of the process of explanation is correct, it would appear that any apparatus or organism which is to perform such operations must possess certain properties determined by the properties of the events which it is to explain. If explanation involves that kind of joint classification of many elements which we have described as ‘model-building’, the relation between the explaining agent and the explained object must satisfy such formal relations as must exist between any apparatus of classification and the individual objects which it classifies. (Cf. 5.77–5.91.)

8.69. The proposition which we shall attempt to establish is that any apparatus of classification must possess a structure of a higher degree of complexity than is possessed by the objects which it classifies; and that, therefore, the capacity of any explaining agent must be limited to objects with a structure possessing a degree of complexity lower than its own. If this is correct, it means that no explaining agent can ever explain objects of its own kind, or of its own degree of complexity, and, therefore, that the human brain can never fully explain its own operations. This statement possesses, probably, a high degree of prima facie plausibility. It is, however, of such importance and far-reaching consequences, that we must attempt a stricter proof.

8.70. We shall attempt such a demonstration at first for the simple processes of classification of individual elements, and later apply the same reasoning to those processes of joint classification which we have called model-building. Our first task must be to make clear what we mean when we speak of the ‘degree of complexity’ of the objects of classification and of the classifying apparatus. What we require is a measure of this degree of complexity which can be expressed in numerical terms.

8.71. So far as the objects of classification are concerned, it is necessary in the first instance to remember that for our purposes we are not interested in all the properties which a physical object may possess in an objective sense, but only in those ‘properties’ according to which these objects are to be classified. For our purposes the complete classification of the object is its complete definition, containing all that with which we are concerned in respect to it.

8.72. The degree of complexity of the objects of classification may then be measured by the number of different classes under which it is subsumed, or the number of different ‘heads’ under which it is classified. This number expresses the maximum number of points with regard to which the response of the classifying apparatus to this object may differ from its responses to any one other object which it is also capable of classifying. If the object in question is classified under n heads, it can evidently differ from any one other object that is classified by the same apparatus in n different ways.

8.73. In order that the classifying apparatus should be able to respond differently to any two objects which are classified differently under any one of these n heads, this apparatus will clearly have to be capable of distinguishing between a number of classes much larger than n. If any individual object may or may not belong to any one of the n classes A, B, C, . . . N, and if all individual objects differing from each other in their membership of any one of these classes are to be treated as members of separate classes, then the number of different classes of objects to which the classifying apparatus will have to be able to respond differently will, according to a simple theorem of combinatorial analysis, have to be 2n+1.

8.74. The number of different responses (or groups of responses), of which the classifying apparatus is capable, or the number of different classes it is able to form, will thus have to be of a definitely higher order of magnitude than the number of classes to which any individual object of classification can belong. This remains true when many of the individual classes to which a particular object belongs are mutually exclusive or disjunct, so that it can belong only to either A1 or A2 or A3 . . . and to either B1 or B2 or B3 . . . etc. If in such a case the number of variable ‘attributes’ which distinguish elements of A1 from elements of A2 and of A3, and elements of B1 from those of B2 and B3, etc., is m and each of these m different variable attributes may assume n different ‘values’, although any one element will belong to at most m different classes, the number of distinct combinations of attributes to which the classifying apparatus will have to respond will still be equal to nm.

8.75. In the same way in which we have used the number of different classes to which any one element can be assigned as the measure of the degree of its complexity, we can use the number of different classes to which the classifying apparatus will have to respond differently as the measure of complexity of that apparatus. It is evidently this number which indicates the variety of ways in which any one scheme of classification for a given set of elements may differ from any other scheme of classification for the different schemes of classification which can be applied to the given set of elements. Such a scheme for classifying the different possible schemes of classification would in turn have to possess a degree of complexity as much greater than that of any of the latter as their degree of complexity exceeds the complexity of any one of the elements.

8.76. What is true of the relationship between the degree of complexity of the different elements to be classified and that of the apparatus which can perform such classification, is, of course, equally true of that kind of joint or simultaneous classification which we have called ‘model-building’. It differs from the classification of individual elements merely by the fact that the range of possible differences between different constellations of such elements is already of a higher order of magnitude than the range of possible differences between the individual elements, and that in consequence any apparatus capable of building models of all the different possible constellations of such elements must be of an even higher order of complexity.

8.77. An apparatus capable of building within itself models of different constellations of elements must be more complex, in our sense, than any particular constellation of such elements of which it can form a model, because, in addition to showing how any one of these elements will behave in a particular situation, it must be capable also of representing how any one of these elements would behave in any one of a large number of other situations. The ‘new’ result of the particular combination of elements which it is capable of predicting is derived from its capacity of predicting the behaviour of each element under varying conditions.

8.78. The significance of these abstract considerations will become clearer if we consider as illustrations some instances in which this or a similar principle applies. The simplest illustration of the kind is probably provided by a machine designed to sort out certain objects according to some variable property. Such a machine will clearly have to be capable of indicating (or of differentially responding to) a greater number of different properties than any one of the objects to be sorted will possess. If, e.g., it is designed to sort out objects according to their length, any one object can possess only one length, while the machine must be capable of a different response to many different lengths.

8.79. An analogous relationship, which makes it impossible to work out on any calculating machine the (finite) number of distinct operations which can be performed with it, exists between that number and the highest result which the machine can show. If that limit were, e.g., 999,999,999, there will already be 500,000,000 additions of two different figures giving 999,999,999 as a result, 499,999,999 pairs of different figures the addition of which gives 999,999,998 as a result, etc. etc., and therefore a very much larger number of different additions of pairs of figures only than the machine can show. To this would have to be added all additions of more than two figures and all the different instances of the other operations which the machine can perform. The number of distinct calculations it can perform therefore will be clearly of a higher order of magnitude than the highest figure it can enumerate.

8.80. Applying the same general principle to the human brain as an apparatus of classification it would appear to mean that, even though we may understand its modus operandi in general terms, or, in other words, possess an explanation of the principle on which it operates, we shall never, by means of the same brain, be able to arrive at a detailed explanation of its working in particular circumstances, or be able to predict what the results of its operations will be. To achieve this would require a brain of a higher order of complexity, though it might be built on the same general principles. Such a brain might be able to explain what happens in our brain, but it would in turn still be unable fully to explain its own operations, and so on.

8.81. The impossibility of explaining the functioning of the human brain in sufficient detail to enable us to substitute a description in physical terms for a description in terms of mental qualities, applies thus only in so far as the human brain is itself to be used as the instrument of classification. It would not only not apply to a brain built on the same principle but possessing a higher order of complexity, but, paradoxical as this may sound, it also does not exclude the logical possibility that the knowledge of the principle on which the brain operates might enable us to build a machine fully reproducing the action of the brain and capable of predicting how the brain will act in different circumstances.

8.82. Such a machine, designed by the human mind yet capable of ‘explaining’ what the mind is incapable of explaining without its help, is not a self-contradictory conception in the sense in which the idea of the mind directly explaining its own operations involves a contradiction. The achievement of constructing such a machine would not differ in principle from that of constructing a calculating machine which enables us to solve problems which have not been solved before, and the results of whose operations we cannot, strictly speaking, predict beyond saying that they will be in accord with the principles built into the machine. In both instances our knowledge merely of the principle on which the machine operates will enable us to bring about results of which, before the machine produces them, we know only that they will satisfy certain conditions.

8.83. It might appear at first as if this impossibility of a full explanation of mental processes would apply only to the mind as a whole, and not to particular mental processes, a full explanation of which might still enable us to substitute for the description of a particular mental process a fully equivalent statement about a set of physical events. Such a complete explanation of any particular mental process would, if it were possible, of course be something different from, and something more far-reaching than, the kind of partial explanation which we have called ‘explanation of the principle.’

8.84. In order to provide a full explanation of even one particular mental process, such an explanation would have to run entirely in physical terms, and would have to contain no references to any other mental events which were not also at the same time explained in physical terms. Such a possibility is ruled out, however, by the fact, that the mind as an order is a ‘whole’ in the strict sense of the term: the distinct character of mental entities and of their mode of operation is determined by their relations to (or their position in the system of) all other mental entities. No one of them can, therefore, be explained without at the same time explaining all the others, or the whole structure of relationships determining their character.

8.85. So long as we cannot explain the mind as a whole, any attempt to explain particular mental processes must therefore contain references to other mental processes and will thus not achieve a full reduction to a description in physical terms. A full translation of the description of any set of events from the mental to the physical language would thus presuppose knowledge of the complete set of ‘rules of correspondence’13 by which the two languages are related, or a complete account of the orders prevailing in the two worlds.

8.86. This conclusion may be expressed differently by saying that a mental process could be identified with (or ‘reduced to’) a particular physical process only if we were able to show that it occupies in the whole order of mental events a position which is identical with the position which the physical events occupy in the physical order of the organism. The former is a mental process because it occupies a certain position in the whole order of mental process (i.e., because of the manner in which it can affect, and be affected by, other mental processes), and this position in an order can be explained in physical terms only by showing how an equivalent order can be built up from physical elements. Only if we could achieve this could we substitute for our knowledge of mental events a statement of the order existing in a particular part of the physical world.





