5. POSTURES AND MOVEMENTS CONNECTED WITH PERCEPTION


4.45. The first group of motor responses to sensory stimuli which we must consider further are those which assist perception directly and which might almost be described as part of the act of perception. We have already mentioned the classical instance of the kinesthetic sensations connected with the focusing of the eye. The familiar effects of displacing the eyeball or of crossing the fingers on the localization of the sensations affected belong to the same category. It is becoming increasingly clear that these are merely special instances of a very general phenomenon, and that the proprioceptive reports of the body postures and movements designed to help perception serve always as a sort of indispensable background for the proper evaluation of the stimulus.

4.46. Recent investigations of the relation between sensation and movement show that this connexion is even closer than had been commonly supposed and that practically all sensory impulses are evaluated in the light of, or corrected for, simultaneous muscular activities. V. von Weizsaecker, to whom we owe a great deal of knowledge on this question, speaks with considerable justification of a complete ‘entwinement’ (Verflechtung) of sensation and movement.7 This seems to apply as much to the evaluation of external stimuli in the light of the simultaneous proprioceptive impulses as reciprocally to the evaluation of the latter in the light of the usually accompanying exteroceptive impulses. Stretching my leg downwards means for me that I expect to feel the ground, and stretching my whole body means that I expect it to cool more rapidly than in a crouched position, etc., etc. The proprioceptive impulses thus receive their significance as much from the exteroceptive ones which are associated with them, as the reverse is true.

4.47. Every sensory situation thus means, among other things, that various movements will have such and such effects, and the totality of the simultaneous exteroceptive and proprioceptive impulses forms the background, as it were, against which the individual impulse is evaluated. It might even be said that every single sensory impulse is probably multivalent, capable of producing various different sensations, and that which sensation it will produce will depend on what other impulses occur at the same time.





