4. ASSOCIATIVE PROCESSES


5.50. The pattern of nervous impulses which at any moment will be traced within the structure of connected fibres is, of course, a constantly changing pattern. The representations of the different part of the environment which the impulses produce will derive their significance exclusively from the fact that they tend to evoke certain other impulses. Each impulse representing an event in the environment will be the starting point of many chains of associative processes; in these the various further impulses set up will represent events which in the past have become connected for the individual with those which are represented by the impulses which evoke them. If each of these several chains of associative processes were allowed to run its course, unaffected by other similar chains which have been set up by other impulses (which were either part of the same initial position or which are produced by new stimuli), they would tend to produce representations of a variety of consequences which would follow from the initial environment, rather than present a definite picture of that environment.

5.51. The pattern of impulses formed within the structure of connexions will thus function as an apparatus of orientation by representing both the actual state of the environment and the changes to be expected in that environment. This, of course, must not be understood to mean that representations of several different states of affairs can exist simultaneously. It means that each part and the whole of the representation of the existing environment derive their significance from the penumbra of possible consequences attaching to them: what gives every element or group of elements of which the total situation exists their sensory value is their following representing their various potential effects.

5.52. It is particularly important in this connexion not to fall back upon the traditional conception of the individual impulses as such corresponding to particular mental qualities or to conceive of associative processes as simple chains of impulses where physiological elements correspond to mental units. The physiological impulse owes its mental quality to its capacity of evoking other impulses, and what produces the succession of different mental qualities is the same kind of process as that which determines the position of the impulses in the order of mental qualities: it possesses such a quality only because it can evoke a great variety of associated impulses. Association, in other words, is not something additional to the appearance of mental qualities, nor something which acts upon given qualities; it is rather the factor which determines the qualities.

5.53. The mental qualities which succeed each other in the course of associative processes do therefore not correspond to the units between which physiological connexions exist. The sequence of individual mental images (or reproductions) is rather the resultant of the interaction of a multiplicity of streams of impulses, and every new mental quality which is thus evoked will be the effect of not only of those physiological impulses preceding it which have themselves been fully evalued, but also of those which have merely contributed to the evaluation of the former, and of others which have not received sufficient support to obtain a distinct following. Even the simplest succession of mental qualities which appear directly to evoke each other must probably be conceived as the resultant of a complex process of convergence of many impulses.

5.54. We must probably assume that in order than an impulse should be able to produce its own distinctive following and thus obtain a distinct place in the qualitative order it will as a rule require the support from other impulses whose followings closely overlap with its own. But while those to which these applies will occupy, as it were, the centre of the stage, those which are not sufficiently supported to produce their complete following will nevertheless exercise some influence on the further course of the associative processes. Even though only the concentrated stream of impulses which forms the ‘foreground’ will be fully evaluated, its effects will also depend on the less distinct background.

5.55. So far as the appearance in consciousness of successive images is concerned, of which we think in the first instance when we mention ‘associations’, this means, of course, that what further images will be evoked by a conscious event will depend not only on it but also on much which is not conscious. But, as we shall see more fully in the next chapter, the difference between conscious and non-conscious events is a difference of the same kind as that which appears on the highest level as the difference between more or less fully evaluated events. In all these instances the effect which on a given level will be produced by an event occupying a distinct position in the order of that level will depend not only on itself but also on the substructure of less fully discriminated events on which it rests and which forms its background.

5.56. The different associations attaching to individual impulses, and still more those attaching to any one of a group of simultaneous impulses, will often not only not be convergent but even conflicting; and not all the representations which will form part of the following of the elements of the complete situation will be capable of simultaneous realization, or would produce a significant new pattern if they did. Since from each element of the structure of connected fibres impulses can pass in a great variety of directions, the initial stream of impulses would merely diffuse and dissipate itself if the overlapping of the following of the many different impulses did not determine a selection of some among the many potential paths on which they might travel.

5.57. This selection will be brought about by the fact that, where the followings of the representations of the different parts of the environment overlap, the corresponding impulses will reinforce each other by summation (3.13) and by their joint effects evoke sequences of representations which otherwise would have remained merely ‘potential’; while in so far as the various elements set up divergent or even conflicting (mutually inhibiting) tendencies, these flows of impulses will mutually neutralize each other.

5.58. The representation or model of the environment will thus constantly tend to run ahead of the actual situation. This representation of the possible results following from the existing position will, of course, be constantly checked and corrected by the newly arriving sensory signals which record the actual developments in the environment. The newly arriving impulses, on the other hand, in turn will always be evalued against the background of the expectations set up by the previously existing pattern of impulses.

5.59. The representations of the external environment which will guide behaviour will thus be not only representations of the actually existing environment; but also representations of the changes to be expected in that environment. We must therefore conceive of the model as constantly trying out possible developments and determining action in the light of the consequences which from the representations of such actions would appear to follow from it.

5.60. We shall have further to consider the character of these associative processes in the next chapter when we consider conscious thought, and again in the last chapter when we shall have to examine the nature of explanation. At this stage our concern is merely to emphasize that processes essentially analogous to the processes of association which are familiar to us from conscious thought, must be assumed to play a similar rôle already on preconscious levels. The processes of classification with which we are concerned, and which will determine conscious as well as unconscious responses, constitute classifications of complex situations by the joint results to be expected from the simultaneous occurrence of the elements; and this in turn involves the representation of the range of expected results by a pattern of impulses essentially in the same manner in which the actual environment is represented by such a pattern.

5.61. The representation of the existing situation in fact cannot be separated from, and has no significance apart from, the representation of the consequences to which it is likely to lead. Even on a pre-conscious level the organism must live as much in a world of expectation as in a world of ‘fact’, and most responses to a given stimulus are probably determined only via fairly complex processes of ‘trying out’ on the model the effects to be expected from alternative courses of action. The reaction to a stimulus thus frequently implies an anticipation of the consequences to be expected from it.9

5.62. It is these chains of symbolic representations of the consequences to be expected from a given representation of events which we must conceive as constituting those ‘symbolic processes in the brain’ which physiological psychology has been led to postulate10 in order to account for the complex adaptive responses, and to explain the delays involved between stimulus and response even on levels where there is no ground for assuming the presence of consciousness, or where we know that the responses take place without our being aware of the stimulus which has evoked them.





