4. PROPRIOCEPTION OF LOW LEVEL RESPONSES


4.35. The fact that the sensory impulses may evoke responses on many successive levels has great influence on the manner in which they will be discriminated at the higher levels. In so far as sensory impulses evoke such responses at lower levels, they will arrive at the higher levels accompanied by the proprioceptive impulses recording those responses. The higher centres will in consequence at any one time receive reports not only of given external stimuli but also of the body’s spontaneous reaction to those stimuli. The effect of a bright light will not be only a visual impulse but also an impulse reporting the contraction of the pupil, etc. So far as the higher centres are concerned, the self-moving organism must indeed be regarded as part of the environment in which they live.

4.36. Since as a result of the excessive stress placed by the behaviourists on the peripheral responses, certain misconceptions about their significance are still prevalent, it will be necessary to consider with some care the rôle which such peripheral movements can play in the structure of nervous action. The first point which requires emphasis is that peripheral events, in order to influence further central nervous processes, must be reported back to the centres in which these processes take place. It will therefore be neither the resulting movements as such, nor the efferent motor impulses, but the proprioceptive impulses recording these movements which affect the further neural processes. (The theoretical possibility that part of every efferent neural impulse may, as it were, be branched off before it leaves the centre from which it originates, so as to represent there the resulting movement, can be disregarded because there appears to exist no evidence for this.)

4.37. This means not only that, even where distinct motor responses to the individual stimulus take place, it will still be the (proprioceptive) sensory impulses and not the motor impulses themselves which are important for our purposes, but also that, once a certain peripheral response has become the regular effect of any group of stimuli, it will no longer need actually to occur, since the reports of its occurrence will be associatively evoked by the original stimulus. The emphasis placed by the behaviourists on actual movements, and their efforts to discover at least traces of such movements in the form of ‘implicit speech’ and the like, were thus misplaced. They are not required and the establishment of their existence would not help to answer the problem of what, for instance, constitutes thought.6

4.38. Nevertheless, it is true that the sensory order with which we are concerned is both a result and a cause of the motor activities of the body. Behaviour has to be seen in a double rôle: it is both input and output of the activities of the higher nervous centres. The actions which take place independently of the higher centres help to create the order of the sensory impulses arriving at that centre, while the actions directed from that centre are determined by that order.

4.39. The evaluations of sensory impulses arriving at the highest centres may be compared to the appreciation of the events on the road observed by a person who is being driven in a car, or to the judgements of the pilot of an aeroplane which is being steered by an automatic pilot. In these instances different observed events will lead the passenger of the car, or the pilot of the plane, to expect certain responses of the car or the plane, and those events will come to ‘mean’ for the person particular kinds of responses of the vehicle, just as certain kinds of stimuli mean certain spontaneous responses of the body. The sight of an oncoming car will come to mean the sensation of the car in which the person rides drawing to the right, and the sight of a red traffic light will mean the feeling of the car slowing down. Very soon what will actually be noticed will no longer be that normal response, but only its absence if it fails to occur.

4.40. The position of the highest centres in this respect is somewhat like that of the commander of an army (or of the head of any other hierarchical organization), who knows that his subordinates will respond to various events in a particular manner, and who will often recognize the character of what has happened as much from the response of his subordinates as from direct observation. It will also be similar in the sense that, so long as the decision taken by his subordinates in the light of their limited but perhaps more detailed observation seems appropriate in view of his more comprehensive knowledge, he will not need to interfere; and that only if something known only to him but not to his subordinates makes those normal responses inappropriate will he have to overrule their decisions by issuing special orders.

4.41. In the same manner as, for instance, the captain of a battleship may sometimes recognize the nature of an observed object less from his direct perception of it than from the responses of his ship, so the brain often may get a direct report merely about the action of one of a large class of stimuli and yet be able to recognize its character from the almost simultaneous reports of the responses of the body directed by lower levels. At the same time these responses of the lower centres to particular stimuli, of which the higher centres have no reports, may be governed by general ‘directives’ issued by the higher centres. (We shall see presently that this ‘set’ of the whole organism which determines what the response to a particular stimulus shall be, may in turn be determined either by processes in the highest centre or be the result of subcortical regulation).

4.42. So far as the higher centres are concerned, a given combination of external stimuli will not merely mean that such and such other external events are to be expected, but also that certain adjustments of the organism are taking place. The significance of the effect of cold on the skin will not only be that certain action is indicated, but also that certain responses of the body will automatically come about—not merely a report of a single external stimulus but at the same time also of a change in the state of a great part of the body.

4.43. While it is on the whole more likely that responses via the lowest centres will be innate for the individual, that is, acquired by the race in the course of evolution, while the responses effected by the higher centres will be largely based on individual experience, this cannot be regarded as a universal rule. Probably some inherited responses are effected on fairly high levels, while some learned responses may, after sufficient repetition, become almost completely automatic and be effected at low levels.

4.44. It should also be noted that the degree of modifiability of the response to a particular stimulus by other simultaneous stimuli need not vary in strict correspondence with the extent to which these responses can be altered by individual experience: an acquired response to a given stimulus may be uniquely determined by that one stimulus, while an inherited response may be capable of considerable variation according to the accompanying circumstance.





