CHAPTER EIGHTEEN


THERE’S A CONFERENCE ROOM IN the four seasons residences in Beijing that for Whitney and me was neutral ground. We used to meet there from time to time to discuss Ariston’s upbringing and other issues. One afternoon in August 2014, Whitney summoned me. Whitney was always direct and this time was no different. “I want a divorce,” she said.

I wasn’t surprised. Little things had signaled that she’d been moving in that direction. She’d changed the code on the Austrian safe we’d installed in our apartment. Her message was clear: “I don’t want to give those things to you.” I hadn’t been thinking that we were going to get back together, so I didn’t have a strong emotional reaction to her declaration. Still, I was sorry it had come to this.

Later on, I interpreted her moves as a way to force me to come back to her on her terms. While we’d been separated, Whitney had sent her mother to prod me to move back in. She’d enlisted my mother to help us patch things up. I made it clear that I wasn’t going back to her unless she offered to make real changes in our relationship. I wanted our playing field to be level, not tilted in her favor. She’d grown accustomed to making the decisions in our professional and personal lives. That had to change. Granted, Whitney had been a key guide and teacher to me during some very dark hours. But as I evolved, I needed her to grow with me, to make space for me, and to see me as an equal.

My sense that she was intent on forcing me back into the marriage on her terms was reinforced by her proposed divorce settlement. All she was offering was the $30 million I’d lent my old friend Ding Yi in Hong Kong. But that money was locked up in a court dispute.

During one particularly acrimonious meeting at the Oriental Plaza, she told me that, if we were divorcing, she wasn’t going to give me a dime. “Get money from your friend,” she told me. “You did the deal. He’s your pal.”

“But,” I countered, “if you hadn’t pulled out suddenly, there wouldn’t be a problem like this.”

“Tough luck,” she replied.

Basically, Whitney wanted me to be so lacking in funds that I’d be forced to return to her on my hands and knees. We’d always kept our money in accounts held by Great Ocean. I possessed very little of my own. My name wasn’t on any documents. I was in a real fix.

Battling a two-front war with my erstwhile wife and erstwhile best friend, I faced the most difficult period of my life. This was far worse than the failure of PalmInfo, or the firestorm sparked by the disappearance of airport boss Li Peiying, or even the New York Times story. To help me cope, I recalled the lessons I’d learned during those crises. I resumed meditation. I returned to the philosophical texts I’d studied before. I began to detach myself from the daily goings-on of life, insulate my emotions, and, like my parents had when they first immigrated to Hong Kong, do what needed to be done to make it through.

There’s a hill on the outskirts of Beijing called Xiang, or Fragrant, Mountain that’s dotted with pavilions first built in the twelfth century. Thousands of stone stairs lead to the top and I took a lesson from the mountain into my daily life. Instead of focusing on the peak, I fixed on the step in front of me, knowing that if I did that, I’d get where I needed to go. This lesson remains relevant to me today. Control what you can control. Don’t bother with the rest. You will always , I tell myself, get out of the pool. Still, it was a hard time. A friend of more than two decades was intent on screwing me. And the mother of my son was trying to turn me into a pauper.

Ding Yi, the old friend from whom I was trying to recover $30 million, didn’t help things by highlighting, in documents he filed with the court in Hong Kong, the New York Times story on the Wen family wealth. He apparently wanted to scare the judge into dropping the case. Luckily, it didn’t work. But Ding Yi still had a card to play. With my suit still unadjudicated, he declared bankruptcy, and I suspect that he may have put the money in his second wife’s name. Years later, we’re still in court.

Whitney also vowed to fight me tooth and nail. Although we’d been married in Hong Kong, she succeeded in getting a Beijing court to take our divorce case because inside China it would be easier to lean on the judge. In China, there’s no such thing as joint property. She counted on total victory and wanted to cut me off from any form of financial security.

My only option was to play hardball. I debated whether to take this step. In the end, I threatened to release damaging information about her. I leveraged the New York Times story, too. Our businesses were on the radar of the Chinese authorities and, given the purposely pliable nature of Communist law, there were always things that could be interpreted in a negative light. Despite the reality that Whitney strived to keep her nose clean, my threats compelled her to accept a settlement that provided me with enough to live comfortably. On December 15, 2015, we finalized our divorce.

Those two ordeals taught me a lot about the vagaries of life, especially in China. I learned that friendships aren’t reliable. Nor are marriages. What kind of relationship is left?

Obviously, these issues arise outside China, too. But a few things set these stories apart. One is the hard-hearted, zero-sum, winner-take-all approach pursued by Whitney, Ding Yi, and even Ding Yi’s second wife, Yvonne, the former bar girl who, after her husband declared bankruptcy, succeeded him to become the chairwoman of the company listed on the Hong Kong Stock Exchange. Yvonne’s bizarre story was yet another example of the type of “great leap forward” not unusual in China of the day.

That give-no-quarter feature is a function of the Communist system. From an early age, we Chinese are pitted against one another in a rat race and told that only the strong survive. We’re not taught to cooperate, or to be team players. Rather, we learn how to divide the world into enemies and allies—and that alliances are temporary and allies expendable. We’re prepared to inform on our parents, teachers, and friends if the Party tells us to. And we’re instructed that the only thing that matters is winning and that only suckers suffer moral qualms. This is the guiding philosophy that has kept the Party in power since 1949. Machiavelli would have been at home in China because from birth we learn that the end justifies the means. China under the Party is a coldhearted place.

The second is how much politics played a role in these events. Whitney got the divorce case moved to Beijing because she thought she could play her guanxi game and determine the settlement. Right in the middle of one hearing, the judge excused himself to take a call. Here it comes , I said to myself. She’s making a move behind the scenes to get the judge to rule in her favor. I never learned the content of that call, but it helped convince me that threatening her was the only way out. Ding Yi, too, sought to capitalize on my notoriety, courtesy of the New York Times , to gain leverage in the case I’d brought against him. One confrontation was a divorce proceeding and the other a financial dispute, but politics infected both. And so, as the divorce and court case unfolded, I began to wonder whether it was time for me to leave China again.

My alienation from China’s system intensified in other ways, too. Encouraged by Whitney, I’d gotten to know members of the red aristocracy. When I first met the well connected, like David Li, I was mesmerized. But over time, I became increasingly dismayed by the members of this class.

The sons and daughters of China’s leaders were a species unto themselves. They lived by different rules and inhabited what seemed at times like a different dimension, cut off from the rest of China. Their homes were behind high walls. They didn’t shop with the masses. Their food came from a different supply chain. They traveled in chauffeured limousines, attended schools that were closed to normal Chinese, were cared for at special hospitals, and made money through political access, which they sold or rented out.

Thanks to Whitney, I came across these people with great regularity and got to know them. There was Liu Shilai. He was the grandson of Gu Mu, a veteran of China’s revolution and an ally of Deng Xiaoping. Gu Mu served as a vice-premier in the 1970s and 1980s and was a key figure in jump-starting China’s economic reforms. Liu had been a neighbor of ours.

Liu apparently made his money in a fashion typical of many Chinese redbloods: he seemingly sold his political connections. He obtained fire department permits for discos and medical licenses for plastic surgery clinics. In exchange, he got a cut of the profits.

Liu wanted redbloods like himself to be seen as genuine nobility. He played polo around the world, winning cups in Thailand and hosting tournaments in Beijing. There the crème de la crème of Communist Chinese royalty rubbed elbows and the Chinese ladies—channeling their upper-crust role models in England—donned enormous hats.

I remember a conversation Liu and I had about the June 4 crackdown on pro-democracy protests in 1989. Liu was just a teenager then, but he remembered how scared his relatives had been that the demonstrators would actually succeed in overthrowing the Chinese Communist Party. Liu was living in a courtyard house in central Beijing with his grandfather, Gu Mu. He spent the evening of June 3 on guard at the house with an AK-47 in his lap. Outside, the People’s Liberation Army attacked the protesters and cleared Tiananmen Square.

Another redblood was a friend I’ll call Wolfgang. His grandfather was one of the top leaders of the Chinese Communist Party in the 1930s and 1940s. After the revolution, the grandfather served in key posts but fell afoul of Mao in the late 1950s when he criticized the ruinous Great Leap Forward that cost the lives of millions to starvation. The grandfather spent decades in the political doghouse until he was rehabilitated by Deng Xiaoping in the 1980s.

Given his experience, the grandfather insisted that his son—Wolfgang’s father—avoid politics, so he studied science and took a job at a research institute. When Deng launched market-oriented economic reforms, Wolfgang’s father started a small manufacturing company that made a product that was widely used and highly regulated in China. Given his lineage, Wolfgang’s father won government contracts.

Wolfgang grew up in Beijing as a member of the red aristocracy. He attended the elite Jinshan Elementary School with the rest of the children of high-ranking Party members. When he was a teenager his family left China. Wolfgang was educated in the United States. When he graduated, his father brought Wolfgang, his only son, back to China and into the firm.

The firm continued to make solid profits. In fact, Wolfgang’s business benefited from almost every single transaction made in China, from buying a coffee in Starbucks to purchasing a multimillion-dollar mansion in Shanghai. By this time, another company, run by the People’s Liberation Army, had moved into the same space, but there was room enough for two firms to prosper. This type of duopoly was common in China, with a state-run player sharing the market with a company controlled by a descendant of the red elite.

Wolfgang expanded his company’s production line and got involved in services that gave it access to reams of data. The data was of particular interest to China’s police. Wolfgang shared the data with the police, who trusted him implicitly because of his pedigree. In exchange, the security services brought Wolfgang’s company more business.

Wolfgang and I used to talk about the Chinese system and he regaled me with stories of plying Party bigwigs with prostitutes. He noted that a particularly effective way to bond with a Party official was to share a room with him and several girls at once. He saw the shortcomings of the system, its corruption, and how it twisted people’s souls. He wouldn’t defend China in terms of ideology or values, but he was happy to be mining his bloodline to make a mint. I imagined him as being a bit like Michael Corleone in The Godfather . In my view, Wolfgang was a reluctant mobster.

On the surface, he was thoroughly Westernized. He spoke perfect English and his wife was from Taiwan, but he didn’t question the system. In fact, he helped to sustain it, sharing his data with the cops and chasing contracts with state security.

At the same time, however, Wolfgang had an overseas passport and had invested a good chunk of his wealth abroad. I debated politics with him. “Where does your capital sit?” I asked once, knowing that the bulk of it was outside China. “What kind of passport do you have?” I asked, aware that it wasn’t Chinese.

For years, Western commentators insisted that people like Wolfgang who’d been educated overseas were agents of change in China—that they’d import universal values from the West and push China in a better direction. But people like Wolfgang never saw themselves in that role. His interest was in China’s remaining the way it was. That’s what made him a very rich man and allowed him to reap the benefits of two systems at once, the freedoms of the West and the managed duopolies of authoritarian China.

The more I saw of Wolfgang and others like him, the more I viewed them as highly competent enablers of an increasingly toxic affliction, Chinese Communism. In exchange for a pot of gold, they’d sold their souls. Whitney and I had played by the rules they and their parents had set, and we’d prospered. But we knew the rules were skewed. Whitney was comfortable staying inside this skewed system; I wanted out.

Despite my battling with Whitney in court, she and I maintained a semblance of unity over Ariston’s upbringing. Soon after he was born, Whitney had mapped out his education. She started him in kindergarten at a small international school in Beijing called 3e. She signed him up for horseback riding lessons at Liu Shilai’s equestrian club, an avocation fitting his status as a member of China’s elite. After kindergarten, she’d planned to send him to a top-notch school attached to People’s University in Beijing. For college, he’d be heading overseas to either the United States or England.

But Beijing’s noxious air pollution—coupled with my desire to leave China—prompted Whitney to change her mind. In 2015, Ariston and I moved to England. Whitney and I found a school for him and by April he was settled in.

Later that year, Whitney came over to England for a few months and rented a town house near us to get Ariston further accustomed to such a dramatic change. I’d already begun devoting myself to being Ariston’s primary caregiver. If I’d learned one thing from my research into family legacies, it was this: no parent ever regretted that they’d spent too much time with their kids.

I also worked to improve my relationship with my parents. I took them on vacations around the world. I planned every step of the itinerary and made sure they were comfortable, well fed, and looked after. Over lunch in Florence during a vacation to Italy, my mother, staring off in the distance as if she were speaking to no one in particular, said, “You know, I’m surprised. You’ve turned out to be a good son.”

Whitney still dropped hints to my mother that she was interested in patching things up. After such an acrimonious divorce, it was ironic that she still wanted me back. It showed that on some level, she really valued what we’d built together and what I’d brought to her life. Underneath it all, I suspected, was a loneliness and a fear of having to fight the business battles and the Chinese system on her own. Whitney was nothing if not complicated. When she was looking to purchase a car during her trip to England, she asked me to come to the showroom and help pick one out.

“This is your car,” I said.

“But you choose,” she countered. “You know what’s best.”

At another point she turned to me and said, “I’m not good at relationships, I’m very insecure.” I was unmoved. What I wanted was a sincere apology, but she was too proud.

Despite everything, she still believed she was superior to me in judging China and that I still needed to be schooled in China’s ways. One day in 2016, we met for coffee. We were both in Hong Kong. I suggested again that she should diversify her risk and move some of Great Ocean’s assets out of China. I was just trying to offer some friendly advice. I noted that everyone was doing it. In fact, so many people wanted to take money out of China that the government had slapped controls on the movement of capital. Whitney smirked. China, she said, “is going to continue to go great guns.” Then after a somewhat pregnant pause, she added, “People need to have foresight”—as if she had it and I didn’t. In 2017, during a trip I’d made to Beijing, she let it slip that Party authorities had banned her from leaving China. She didn’t seem concerned and again dismissed my pleas for her to get out of China. “This,” she said, “will soon pass.”





