CHAPTER SIXTEEN


ON OCTOBER 26, 2012, THE New York Times published a front-page article detailing the immense wealth belonging to the family of Wen Jiabao. Based on corporate records, the exposé estimated that the Wen family was worth close to $3 billion. At the beginning of the twentieth paragraph was Whitney’s name. Talk about a blow to the skeleton of our relationship.

Three days before the story ran, the Times reporter, David Barboza, reached out to Whitney, informing her that she was going to be a focus of the piece and requesting comment. Whitney huddled with Auntie Zhang to come up with a response. Barboza told Whitney that he’d be reporting that Great Ocean had been the vehicle used to purchase Ping An stock and that, later, more than 100 million dollars’ worth of shares in Ping An had been transferred to an account belonging to Wen Jiabao’s mother, who was a retired schoolteacher with no source of income other than a government pension.

Whitney and Auntie Zhang initially decided not to comment on the story. Then Whitney contacted Barboza’s Taiwanese wife through her connections in the art world. For several hours, Whitney pleaded with her to convince Barboza to shelve the story. “We’re all Chinese,” I overheard Whitney say to her. “We should be able to settle this amicably. I have children; you have children; you know how much this is going to hurt my family. You wouldn’t wish this on any family.” This was another example of the breach between Whitney’s culture and that of the Western world. But she was desperate. It was a shot in the dark. Needless to say, the Barbozas weren’t interested

Auntie Zhang changed her mind and ordered Whitney to take responsibility for the Ping An deal. She instructed Whitney to talk to Barboza and to tell him that all of the stock held in the names of the premier’s mother and other relatives actually belonged to Whitney and that she’d placed the stock in their names to conceal the size of Whitney’s fortune. “When I invested in Ping An I didn’t want to be written about,” Whitney told the Times , “so I had my relatives find some other people to hold these shares for me.” Whitney’s statement was far-fetched, to say the least. Obviously, it beggared belief. But Whitney’s loyalty to Auntie Zhang compelled her to follow orders. Of course, originally, the stock had all been in Great Ocean’s name to protect the Wens , not Whitney. Only after Whitney and I sold our shares in 2007 did Auntie Zhang make the wrongheaded decision to transfer ownership of the shares to her mother-in-law and others in the clan. That move created a paper trail. If the shares had stayed in Great Ocean’s name, Barboza wouldn’t have had much to hang his story on.

In the back of my mind, I always knew that at a certain point Auntie Zhang would sacrifice Whitney. I’d imagined, however, that by the time that pivot occurred, Whitney would have better protected herself. But I was wrong. Whitney had invested too much of herself in her relationship with Auntie Zhang. She’d also embraced what we Chinese called yiqi , the code of brotherhood, the same code I adhered to with my buddies in Shanghai. She willingly became the fall girl to prove that Auntie Zhang had been right to trust her for all these years.

Most people would have run for the hills, figuring now was not the time to be a hero. But Whitney didn’t. I saw her action as a deeply personal choice, equal parts desperation and courage. Whitney’s Christianity might have played a role. But more than that was her commitment to the relationships that she’d built. I urged her not to talk to Barboza. But she made the decision to do it because her relationships were all she had. In the end, it boiled down to how she saw herself as a person.

For the Wen family and, more broadly, the upper ranks of the Chinese Communist Party, the story struck like an earthquake. The piece marked the second time that year that a Western news agency had detailed the wealth of a leading Communist family. Several months earlier, in June 2012, the Bloomberg news agency had run a similar story about the fortune held by relatives of Vice-President—and soon to be Party chief—Xi Jinping. Interestingly, no one fell on his or her sword for that piece, like Whitney would for Auntie Zhang.

The Party reacted to the Wen story by blocking the New York Times ’s website. A Foreign Ministry spokesman accused the Times of intentionally smearing China and harboring “ulterior motives.” Internally, the Party circled the wagons. True to its paranoid roots, the Party’s leadership viewed the two stories as part of a concerted attack on China’s political leadership by the US government. If the story on Xi’s family hadn’t run, the Party might have reacted differently and Wen could have been targeted. But the Xi story convinced everyone that the United States was somehow to blame for the pieces and that the best response was the animal one: to close ranks.

In private, Wen Jiabao was livid at the revelations about the business activities of his family members, especially Auntie Zhang and his son, Winston. (Wen’s daughter, Lily, was not named in the original story, but would be in later pieces in the Times .) Whitney and I believed that Auntie Zhang and her children had kept Wen in the dark about many things. We also understood that Wen earlier had discovered some of his family’s business activities and had voiced his disapproval.

This time, we were told, Wen demanded a divorce. In a rage, he declared to his relatives that he was preparing to shave his head and enter a Buddhist monastery after retirement. At that point, Party authorities stepped in—to stop both the divorce and Wen’s impulse to, as Buddhists say, “see through the red dust” of human desire and become a monk. That last move would have looked especially bad for a Party that was officially, at least, atheist.

The fallout from the story built like a tsunami, which starts with a low tide. Our relationship with the Wen family changed. Auntie Zhang informed us that the family was no longer interested in taking 30 percent of our projects. We’d only recently broken ground on the Bulgari hotel and suddenly Auntie Zhang told us she was pulling out. We didn’t know how to take it; we thought she’d change her mind. We’d never signed any contracts with Auntie Zhang. Like so much in China, everything was implicit.

Following the Times exposé, Whitney shut down her networking activity. She didn’t reach out to anyone and no one reached out to her. She didn’t want to put people in a difficult spot. Meanwhile, I tried to assess how much risk we faced. I had a sense that there’d be ramifications, but I didn’t know what they’d be or when they’d hit. We waited for a month and continued to work on the hotel. No one from the security services or the Party’s feared Central Commission for Discipline Inspection darkened our door.

Auntie Zhang told us that she had directed her son and daughter to get out of the spotlight. Winston Wen went to work for a state-owned enterprise. Lily Chang shuttered her consulting business and joined the State Administration of Foreign Exchange. Auntie Zhang also dropped a plan to use a big swath of land in northern Beijing to build a jewelry vocational training center. She turned it over to her son, Winston, who set to work building the Keystone Academy, a school with pretensions of becoming Communist China’s finest boarding school.

Auntie Zhang told Whitney she was convinced someone was trying to destroy her family. She searched for a source of the story. Citing contacts inside China’s government, Auntie Zhang said that she believed her husband’s reputation had become collateral damage in a life-and-death power struggle inside the Party.

The struggle pitted Xi Jinping against an official named Bo Xilai. Both were sons of Communist “immortals,” veterans of Mao’s revolution. And both owed their careers to a Party decision made in 1981 and pushed by a high-ranking Communist named Chen Yun to establish a special office in the Party’s personnel department called the Young Cadres Section. That section’s purpose was to ensure that the sons and daughters of senior Party members were given good positions in the government and the Party. “If our sons and daughters succeed us,” Chen Yun declared, “they won’t dig up our graves.” The Tiananmen Square crackdown of 1989 gave this work added urgency. A key lesson that the red aristocracy drew from that turmoil was that, as the saying went, “you can best depend on your own kids.” Each leading family chose an heir to be groomed for future political leadership. Nominated by their fathers, Xi and Bo rose through the Party ranks.

Xi’s father, Xi Zhongxun, was a hero of the Party’s civil war against Chiang Kai-shek’s Nationalist forces in the 1930s and 1940s. In the late 1970s and early 1980s, he played a key role in establishing economic policies that transformed China into the factory of the world.

Bo Xilai was the son of Bo Yibo, another of Chairman Mao’s lieutenants. Bo Yibo also battled Nationalist forces. Bo Yibo was more conservative than Xi Zhongxun when it came to economic reforms, but in the 1980s he oversaw the creation of China’s two stock markets, in Shanghai and Shenzhen.

By the early 1990s, Bo Xilai had risen to prominence as the dashing mayor of the seaside city of Dalian. He subsequently served as governor of Liaoning Province, minister of commerce, and then in 2007 he was appointed Party secretary in Chongqing, a massive city in China’s southwest once known to Westerners as Chunking. With a mane of slicked-back black hair and a radiant, million-dollar smile, Bo was a media darling, always ready with a pithy quote. If Bo had been an American, he’d have been the guy who parlayed a successful string of used-car lots into a seat in Congress.

Xi Jinping was less flamboyant and far more careful. When he was an official in Fujian Province in the 1990s, his coworkers had no idea he was wooing and would ultimately marry the Chinese army singer-celebrity Peng Liyuan. Xi had split with his first wife, the daughter of a Chinese diplomat, over her desire to stay in Britain, where she’d gone to study.

Xi’s resumé, which included top government and Party posts in Shanghai and Zhejiang provinces, was no less impressive than Bo’s. Still, to the media, Xi was a relative unknown when he burst on the scene in November 2002 as a member of the Party’s Central Committee. Bo also won a coveted spot on the Central Committee that year following intense lobbying by his father. Five years later, however, Xi pulled ahead in the race to be China’s next ruler. Although Bo Xilai won a seat on the Politburo in 2007, only Xi was elevated to the Politburo’s Standing Committee, China’s top political body.

Whitney and I heard a lot of stories about Bo’s desperation to get back in the race and the attention-getting activities he organized to do so. As Party chief in Chongqing, Bo raised his profile by launching political campaigns redolent of the mass mobilizations that occurred under Chairman Mao during the Cultural Revolution. Playing on the nostalgia for China’s early revolutionary days, he’d organize huge rallies where thousands of city residents would gather to participate in sing-alongs belting out old Communist tunes.

But Bo’s ambition brought him down. His fall began on November 15, 2011, when the body of British businessman Neil Heywood was found in room 1605 of the Lucky Holiday Hotel, a threadbare guesthouse in Chongqing. The initial report on Heywood blamed “sudden death after drinking alcohol” and his body was cremated without an autopsy.

Heywood had been a longtime business partner of Bo’s glamorous second wife, Gu Kailai. When Chongqing’s police chief, Wang Lijun looked into the case, he discovered that Bo’s wife had poisoned Heywood over a business dispute.

Wang went to Bo Xilai’s office and told him. Bo took that as an implicit threat. In his mind, as a loyal police chief, Wang should’ve just quashed the case and made it go away. Bo jumped up from behind his desk and slapped Wang with a force hard enough to puncture Wang’s eardrum. Bo then fired Wang and had him placed under investigation for corruption.

Fearing that he’d be the next murder victim, Wang fled Chongqing and on February 6, 2012, knocked on the door of the US Consulate in nearby Chengdu, where he told his story to American diplomats and requested political asylum. As Wang made his case inside the US mission, police officers representing various competing political factions ringed the consulate in a tense standoff. A day later, US officials handed Wang over to a vice-minister from the Ministry of State Security, who took Chongqing’s top cop to Beijing. All of this unfolded at an inauspicious time—as the Party readied for the annual meeting of the National People’s Congress the following month.

Auntie Zhang revealed to us that following Wang Lijun’s arrival in Beijing, the nine-member Standing Committee of the Politburo met to discuss the scandal. Zhou Yongkang, the Standing Committee member in charge of China’s security services and an ally of Bo Xilai, spoke first, arguing that the investigation should stop at police chief Wang. Silence descended on the meeting, Auntie Zhang said. Zhou’s declaration meant that there would be no investigation of Bo Xilai. Members of the Standing Committee pondered Zhou’s view. When no one spoke up, Xi Jinping, who was relatively low in seniority, broke with protocol to speak. He asserted instead that the Party investigate not only Wang but also anyone else who might’ve been involved. He didn’t need to mention Bo Xilai or Bo’s wife, because the implication was obvious to everyone at the meeting. Xi knew if he didn’t speak up then, he’d lose a golden opportunity to rid himself of his archrival.

As number two on the Standing Committee, Wen Jiabao had a key say. He concurred with Xi Jinping. Next, Party chief Hu Jintao, ever cautious, also backed a complete investigation. And that’s how the tide shifted. When the Standing Committee of the Politburo finally voted on how to handle the situation during a subsequent meeting on March 7, only Zhou opposed a plan to expel Bo Xilai from the Party, hand his case to China’s prosecutors, and investigate Bo’s wife for killing Neil Heywood.

The decision to purge Bo set the stage for a dramatic press conference at the close of the National People’s Congress on March 14. This was Wen Jiabao’s final news conference after a decade as premier. Responding to a question from the New York Times , Wen rebuked Bo Xilai and called on the Chongqing municipal Party committee to “reflect seriously and learn from the Wang Lijun incident.” That was a bombshell. Not only had Wen backed Xi in his battle with Bo behind closed doors, but now he was publicly shaming Bo. A day later, Bo was dismissed from his post as Chongqing Party boss. On April 10, he was kicked off the Party’s Central Committee and out of the Politburo. In September, a Chinese court sentenced him to life in prison. And on November 15 of that year, Xi Jinping became general secretary of the Chinese Communist Party.

Auntie Zhang believed that her husband’s support for the investigation and his participation in the public shaming of Bo Xilai put him on a collision course with Bo’s allies, some of whom were in China’s security services. Other information that came to our attention supports Auntie Zhang’s view. In February 2012, Whitney and I heard chatter that Bo had hired Chinese journalists and academics to dig up dirt on Auntie Zhang and her children. Barboza, when asked how he came to write his story, has always denied obtaining information from Party insiders looking to help Bo get even with Wen Jiabao. But Auntie Zhang said she’d learned that security officers loyal to Bo Xilai handed over boxes of documents to Barboza in Hong Kong.

In 2013, about a year after Xi Jinping had launched his anti-corruption campaign and a year after the Times story on the Wen family wealth, Auntie Zhang told us that she and her kids had “donated” all of their assets to the state in exchange for a guarantee that they wouldn’t be prosecuted. She said other red families had done the same. There was another reason behind this action. The Party wanted to rewrite history. In the future, if the Party faced allegations of tolerating systemic corruption, it could claim that these red families, in “donating” their wealth to China, had only been serving the state. All this seemed pretty surreal to Whitney and me. But then again, China’s Communists had a long record of stealing private property and distorting the truth.

The Times story strengthened my case that Whitney and I should put a substantial portion of our investments overseas and stop relying on our ties to the Party to do business in China. We were skilled enough, I argued, to compete in the open market. We’d had great success playing the guanxi game, but, I thought, it was time to transition to a new model. My position was bolstered by some of our Western partners who’d become close friends. International players like Paul Katz, CEO of the Kohn Pedersen Fox architectural firm, were impressed with our work and encouraged us to vie for projects overseas.

Whitney didn’t agree. She was afraid of going international. And she argued that, because Wen had played such a crucial role in Xi’s rise, Xi would protect Wen and his family—and, by extension, us. She thought our future remained bright in China, using the old methods to make our way.

Other issues arose between us. One evening as we lay in bed, she showed me the divination of a fortune teller. Getting one’s fortune told was all the rage among China’s elite. People at the top of China’s pyramid hired soothsayers, qigong masters, and purveyors of all sorts of hocus-pocus. In its seventy years in power, the Party had destroyed traditional Chinese values and had essentially outlawed religion. In the vacuum, superstition took hold. In an unpredictable system, where a person can go from top to bottom in a flash, totems promising to make sense of life become very appealing.

Whitney brought out a small red booklet in which the soothsayer had written her fortune with a calligraphy brush. What caught my eye wasn’t the prognostication; it was her year of birth. The fortune teller had written “1966.” All along Whitney had told me she was born in 1968, the same year as me.

My birthday was in November 1968 and I’d been led to believe that Whitney was born in December of that same year, making me about a month older. Suddenly I discovered that she was actually two years my senior. She’d concealed her real age from me, but not from the fortune teller. Without her true date of birth, he wouldn’t have been able to give her an accurate reading.

“What the heck is this?” I asked, pointing to her date of birth. Whitney blanched slightly. “I’ve been married to you for ten years and I never knew your real age,” I said.

She paused. “I’m still me,” she said sheepishly.

“Yeah, but not exactly,” I said. “The most basic information a person can give is their name, birthday, and gender. If you fill out any form, those are the first three questions asked. If you change any one of those, and say you’re the same person, well, that’s not actually true.”

“I’m still me,” she repeated.

Whitney explained that she’d discussed the issue with her mother when we first started going out. Her mother had observed that we seemed to be a perfect match. “Don’t tempt fate by telling him your real age,” her mother advised. Both women worried that if I knew Whitney was older than me, given China’s patriarchal society in which wives are invariably younger than their husbands, I might walk away.

Learning about the deception so late into our relationship was another blow. We were at loggerheads over the future of our work together and were constantly bickering in front of our staff. And now this.

We also clashed over another project that Whitney was eager to do. We were considering bidding on a deal to redevelop a huge site next to the China World Hotel that anchored Beijing’s Central Business District. It promised to be a massive enterprise of almost 5 million square feet, with skyscrapers and malls. No other chunk of property was worth more in China.

As we carried on negotiations to redevelop the land, I got a sense of the heat we’d be under. I found myself getting wined and dined by businessmen and their Party contacts for a piece of the project. A representative from the Hong Kong developer Sun Hung Kai Properties, one of the world’s leaders in the field, came to Beijing and lunched with us and Auntie Zhang. As soon as the meal ended, Whitney’s cell phone rang and it was Chen Zuo’er, who was then serving as deputy director of the State Council’s Hong Kong and Macao Affairs Office. Whitney put Chen on speaker, and I sat there listening to him urging us to sell a controlling stake in the project to Sun Hung Kai. That was pretty shocking. Chen was a minister-level official in China’s government. And here he was brazenly lobbying on behalf of a Hong Kong business for a real estate deal in Beijing. It showed how cozy the ties were between Communist Party officials involved in Hong Kong’s affairs and the Hong Kong business elite. We said we’d consider the request.

I evaluated the situation and got a sense of how complicated the project would be. The approval process would make the airport look like a cakewalk. We’d probably need not just one but at least two allies on the Standing Committee of the Politburo to have any chance of garnering all the permissions to make it work. And even then, there’d be political pressure. I told my staff to pull back from the deal. Whitney wasn’t happy.

Then another deal pushed us further apart.

In early 2013, I lent a friend $30 million to buy a Hong Kong– listed company, with a commitment for a second tranche to help him finish the transaction. I’d known the friend, Ding Yi, for years. Like me, he was born in China but grew up overseas, in his case Australia. We’d met in the 1990s, after I first returned to Hong Kong. We spent a lot of late nights together in Hong Kong’s Lan Kwai Fong entertainment district and on Beijing’s Bar Street. I considered him one of my best pals.

Ding Yi had worked for a Swiss bank and a Chinese investment firm, made a fortune, and then lost it during the Asian Financial Crisis in 2007. His wife represented an international metals-trading company that did business in China.

At one point, his wife’s firm got tangled up in a business dispute. Then a Chinese bank paid the police to arrest his wife and hold her hostage, a common occurrence on the mainland. After the police tossed her in a village lockup in faraway Xinjiang in the northwest corner of China, Ding Yi spent years trying to free her. He ultimately succeeded, something I found particularly impressive, considering that in the meantime he’d divorced his wife and married her receptionist, a former bar girl from Shanghai who’d taken the English name Yvonne. But this was China and people led contradictory lives. Anyway, I figured that someone who’d go to bat for his ex-wife would be trustworthy.

In October 2013, the second tranche of my loan was due. I went to Whitney for the money, but she refused. “We had a deal,” I told her during a heated meeting. “I don’t want to do it anymore,” she responded. I went back to Ding Yi with the bad news. He wasn’t happy. Incapable of raising money to complete the transaction, I asked him to sell his stake in the company and return the $30 million. He balked. Ding Yi’s second wife, Yvonne, apparently played a role here. During a party at a Hong Kong nightclub that her husband had thrown in my honor, she’d propositioned me and I’d turned her down. Again, this was China, where no one missed an opportunity to try for a bigger fish, and, if snubbed, no one forgot a slight. I figured that she’d urged Ding Yi not to pay me back.

I felt Ding Yi was trying to play me. I went to Hong Kong a lot. Each time, we’d go out, have a meal, and hit the bars. Ding Yi was unfailingly buddy-buddy. Finally, I confronted him about the money and he just up and disappeared. I had no recourse but to get a lawyer and take him to court. He denied that the money he’d invested in the listed company was mine.

At home, things weren’t any better with Whitney; our interactions grew more forced. By this time Whitney and I were living in the residences attached to the Four Seasons Hotel to be nearer to the Bulgari site. In late October 2013, I moved out.





