CHAPTER TEN


A TALL, BONY BUREAUCRAT WHO was proud of his full mane of thick black hair, Grandpa Kuang served as the director of the airport construction bureau of the Civil Aviation Administration and later in a similar position at the National Development and Reform Commission, the department that generated the Five-Year Plan. He was pretty low on China’s bureaucratic totem pole. At the Civil Aviation Administration, he didn’t even have his own office; he shared it with two subordinates. Nonetheless, he was a powerhouse.

China was undergoing an airport construction boom. When Whitney and I started the logistics hub, China had 120 airports. By the time we sold it, there were 180. Kuang’s bureau was responsible for approving each project. It wasn’t unusual for provincial deputy governors, who qualified as gaogan and far outranked Grandpa Kuang in the Party hierarchy, to travel to Beijing to plead with him personally to certify their plans. Kuang made these supplicants line up outside his office, where they’d busy themselves playing video games on their phones. Kuang had his office arranged so that he faced the wall on the right side of the door. When he finally granted these officials an audience, he didn’t bother to turn around to face them. He’d simply balance his chair on two legs and offer them a dead-fish handshake over his right shoulder. He didn’t even say hello.

Officials began calling Kuang, who was only in his mid-forties, Grandpa due to his influence. In the West, they might’ve dubbed him something like Big Daddy. But in China, grandfathers are higher on the social hierarchy than fathers, so people called him Gramps.

Kuang fancied himself an intellectual. I took him out to dinner a few times and invariably he’d throw out a few sentences from classical Chinese poetry, to which I’d always respond with a shit-eating grin, declaring, “Director Kuang’s level of culture is very high!” He knew I was buttering him up, but he’d heard others say the same thing so many times that he actually started to believe it.

We needed Kuang’s approval because we wanted to increase the size of the airport expansion project. As I’ve written, Shunyi District had originally planned an expressway along the airport’s border. We needed to scrap the expressway to combine the zones in Shunyi and the airport into one. We wanted things configured so that when cargo came off planes, a truck would be able to move the goods into bonded warehouses without leaving the airport’s grounds.

Whitney and I twisted ourselves into knots catering to Kuang’s whims. At meals, I plied him with expensive dishes. I offered him bottles of ten-year-old Moutai. Whitney discussed Chinese literary figures with him and, like me, praised Kuang’s knowledge of Chinese poetry. We’d go to the theater together and afterward Whitney and I would pretend to be interested in his take on the show. We both encouraged Kuang’s self-regard. I worked on Kuang’s emerging appreciation of red wine. Wine was just beginning to gain a foothold in China, so Kuang was anxious to appear au courant. His comments were unpolished, but I’d praise them anyway. After months of schmoozing, Grandpa Kuang approved our plans. In the end, however, he alienated too many people above his pay grade. In December 2009, state-run media reported that he was being prosecuted for corruption. He was sentenced to ten years in jail.

We played a similar game with a vast array of bureaucrats. Each approval was obtained through connections. Each connection meant an investment in a personal relationship, which meant an awful lot of effort and even more Moutai. Forging personal ties and establishing guanxi was the most difficult part. Guanxi wasn’t a contractual relationship per se: it was a human-to-human connection, built painstakingly over time. You had to show genuine concern for the person. The tough part was that I had so many relationships that needed managing, but I also had a project on my back with a deadline. I had to squeeze all of these interactions into a pipe, and the diameter of the pipe was time. Obviously, I had to delegate, but the more I got directly involved in relationship building the more approvals we received.

In addition to Kuang, we also needed approvals from the Chinese Customs bureau and from the General Administration of Quality Supervision, Inspection and Quarantine. But even when we obtained them at the national level, we still required the cooperation of officers on the ground. In fact, it often didn’t matter if the minister was on board. His underlings could always scotch the deal. They’d raise a bunch of totally legitimate, execution-level issues that sounded reasonable. Because the minister didn’t concern himself with minutiae, he’d just say, “sort it out as soon as you can.” In that way, control of the project leaked from the top of the bureaucracy to the bottom.

One particularly tough nut was the chief of Chinese Customs at the airport. Fat, in his mid-fifties, and so bald that his head resembled a khaki-colored cue ball, Du Pingfa saw the project as an opportunity to leave a legacy behind. Previously, the airport’s expansion had been carried out randomly and Chinese Customs found itself spread out across the facility with its various dorms, warehouses, and offices separated by almost a mile. Our project promised Customs a centralized location.

In exchange for his cooperation, Chief Du had some needs. He demanded we build Customs a new office building, providing four hundred thousand square feet of space for his three-hundred-man workforce. He also pressed for an indoor gym with regulation-size basketball and badminton courts, outdoor tennis courts with a high-end surface, a two-hundred-seat theater, a dormitory with four-star-equivalent rooms, a generous banquet hall with private rooms for senior officials, a karaoke bar, and a grand lobby with an atrium two stories high. Chief Du hashed this out with me over dinner one night. “If you don’t give this to us,” he said with a big grin, “we’re not going to let you build.” All of our political backing couldn’t move him. In the end, his demands added $50 million to the cost of the project, and that didn’t even take into account the cost of the land.

Obviously, when one part of the bureaucracy makes a killing, other parts smell blood, too. The quarantine department demanded two hundred thousand square feet of office space. They didn’t get the theater or the indoor gym, but they did cadge tennis courts, a big restaurant, and rooms at the standard of a four-star hotel. The Quarantine guys never let me forget it. “You owe us,” one of their senior officials told me whenever we met. “We were never as greedy as Customs.”

We started the airport project with an initial investment of $30 million. Whitney and I put up $12 million. Auntie Zhang promised to pay $4 million, but she didn’t put down any capital. We also took out loans. And this is where our association with state-owned players came in handy.

Having airport boss Li Peiying as the chairman of our joint venture gave us access to a huge pool of capital. The Beijing Capital International Airport Group opened up a line of credit for our project. Banks approved loans for us at an interest rate set for state-owned enterprises, which was at least two points lower than the rate set for private ventures. China’s economic system had always been geared to benefit state-run firms over private ones. Even at the height of China’s short-lived capitalist experiment in the early 2000s, the rules were skewed toward state firms. We couldn’t have pulled off the project without them.

Li Peiying was all in. He used his muscle and charisma to make sure his underlings supported our work. With Li as our greatest ally, and with our muleheaded moxie, we finally broke ground on June 29, 2006, more than three years after Whitney had hatched the plan. At that point, we expanded the venture’s capital by another $30 million.

Then, just months into construction, our first crisis hit.

Most of the employees at the airport loved Li Peiying, but he’d ruffled feathers as he hectored and strong-armed his staff to get things done. As the head of almost forty airports, he was a target. He’d beaten out many officials to get the top job. Lots of competitors hankered after his post.

The state-owned bureaucracy had a cardinal rule. Under the regulations set by the state-owned Assets Supervision and Administration Commission, which was responsible for all of China’s state-owned companies, each firm was supposed to generate a 6 percent return on equity every year. Smart SOE bosses hit the target because they understood that if they came in too low, they’d get sacked, but if their return was too high, foes would angle to get their jobs. Li Peiying violated that cardinal rule. He’d made his position a plum assignment because he’d done too good a job.

Add to that Li’s gambling habit, which left him open to allegations of corruption. Enemies constantly wrote reports to the Party’s Discipline Inspection Committee ratting him out. Finally, in late 2006, the allegations proved too much and Li Peiying vanished into the maw of a Communist Party investigation.

Li went incommunicado for months. On January 26, 2007, the Civil Aviation Administration announced that Peiying was no longer the general manager of the Beijing Capital International Airport Group, but bizarrely he retained his position as chairman of our joint venture. That meant we still needed his signature to move our project along. But we couldn’t find him. And no official authority would tell us where he was.

Without Li’s signature, we couldn’t draw on the loans that we’d already secured from our banks. All of us involved in the project began guessing about the implications of his disappearance. The vultures began to circle. Contractors lined up for money. The joint venture had poured hundreds of millions of dollars into this venture and was on the hook for millions more and suddenly our bank account was down to $150,000. Forget about the contractors, I couldn’t even make payroll for my staff. I woke up in the middle of the night in cold sweats wondering how I was going to make it through. My hair fell out in clumps, never to return. Whitney was hard on me. “What are we going to do if it fails?” she asked.

To make things worse, at about this time we needed to demolish some buildings to make way for warehouses. The accepted narrative—at least in the West—is that avaricious developers in China run roughshod over tenants’ rights. And that does happen. But what also happens is that people learn of your plans to develop a section of town and buy out the existing owners with the goal of extorting a handsome inducement to leave.

Several buildings were sitting in the middle of our construction site, but their owners had refused to let us level them. The owners were connected with officials from the Shunyi District government. So even though the Shunyi government was our joint-venture partner, the locals were playing both sides against each other, waiting for a fat payoff. But I couldn’t make that payoff. Since our venture involved a state-owned enterprise, our books were monitored by the State-owned Assets Supervision and Administration Commission. I couldn’t hand over a few million to the building’s owner to get him to disappear even if I’d wanted to. Right in the middle of all this, in November 2006, Li Ping, Shunyi’s district chief, was transferred, severing a key connection to the local government.

Then, at our office, I began to discover bookkeeping discrepancies. It appeared that our construction manager was pilfering from the joint venture. Although I lacked absolute proof, one day I came unannounced into his office and accused him of embezzling funds. “You’re stealing from a state-owned enterprise. That’s like stealing from the state,” I said. “You can deny it, but I will give my proof to the cops and then you all can sort it out.” He cleared out the same day. You need to play the cards you’re dealt. I was learning how to be a boss in China.

It must have been the swimmer in me; I just kept paddling. I didn’t know when or whether I was going to reach the other side of the pool. But I saw no other way. I kept wining and dining the people I needed. Many days I’d go through one bottle of Moutai at lunch and another at dinner—my liver be damned—in a desperate attempt to delay payments, smooth relations, or procure a loan. We stumbled along. Two breakthroughs saved us.

On March 1, 2007, Ping An listed on the Shanghai Stock Exchange, opening up the possibility that we could sell our shares and use more of our own capital to save the airport project. Under the rules, we couldn’t trade for six months. During that time Ping An’s share price surged as high as eighty times, bringing the value of our 1 percent of the company to almost $1 billion. I found a buyer who agreed to purchase our shares at forty times our initial investment, once the blackout period ended. That meant a profit of more than $450 million. But Whitney refused. She thought Ping An’s stock price wouldn’t stop rising. She and I had fundamentally different perceptions about risk. She never saw a potential downside to holding assets, but I’d lived through the Asian Financial Crisis of 2007. She and the rest of her generation of Chinese entrepreneurs had never experienced a downturn. If there was a down cycle, it was always followed by a V-shaped recovery and a huge bounce back. I, however, wanted to limit our downside risk.

Six months after Ping An listed on the Shanghai Stock Exchange, I convinced Whitney that we needed to sell. We cleared a profit of over $300 million, about twenty-six times our initial investment. Auntie Zhang’s stake was worth double that of ours with a potential profit above $600 million. But she didn’t sell. Worried that so much of her family’s fortune was technically owned by Great Ocean, Auntie Zhang decided instead to transfer the name on the stock from Whitney’s company to that of Wen Jiabao’s mother. That move would prove to be a fateful mistake.

The Ping An sale allowed us to keep the airport project afloat. We injected another $40 million of our private money into the joint venture to make sure construction continued. Our friends thought we were crazy to use our own funds to help a state enterprise when at that time most private entrepreneurs were using state money to benefit themselves. Suffice it to say, Whitney didn’t agree to subsidize the project willingly.

Still, after Li Ping’s departure, I needed a new way into the Shunyi government. I found one in, of all places, Los Angeles.

In April 2008, I hosted a group of officials from Shunyi and the airport on a “study tour” to the United States. Such junkets were common in those days and an essential part of doing business in China. There was always a little study—we planned to visit a few airport logistics hubs and to attend an industry conference—but the main goal for me was bonding, and for my guests it was the prospect of a pleasure-packed excursion to the USA. Our first stop was Los Angeles, but everyone was really looking forward to Las Vegas.

On the trip was a deputy district leader named Li Yousheng. Li had three stents in his heart and was under the care of a prominent cardiologist at Beijing’s 301 Hospital, China’s version of America’s Walter Reed National Military Medical Center. Li’s doctor had cleared him for travel.

Arriving in LA, we checked into the Peninsula hotel on Santa Monica Boulevard in Beverly Hills and tucked into a big meal. The guys were itching to go out, so I found them a local casino, and they spent all night playing blackjack. Nobody, including Li Yousheng, slept.

The next morning at breakfast, Li complained of chest pains. I brought him to the UCLA Medical Center and got him in to see a cardiologist. A blood test revealed elevated enzyme levels. The doctor strongly recommended that Li stay for observation. But the rest of the gang had headed off to Vegas and Li wanted to join them. He called his doctor in Beijing. “We know you’ve always had elevated enzymes,” the doctor said. “Americans are too cautious. If you were in Beijing, you’d be released.” The American cardiologist didn’t agree, but Li insisted on leaving. We went back to the hotel for lunch and then planned to catch up to the group in Vegas.

After we ate, Li and I walked through the Peninsula’s lobby. As he rounded a bouquet of flowers in the middle of the hall, Li collapsed in a heap. Foam collected around his mouth. I fumbled with my cell phone and called 911 but then decided on bundling him into a taxi to get him to the hospital faster. What if he dies in the car? I thought as the cab took a wrong turn.

Finally, back at the UCLA Medical Center, we were rushed from the ER to an operating room. A team of surgeons went at Li for seven hours, performing a triple bypass. By the end of the operation, the whole delegation had returned to LA and was camping out in the hospital’s waiting room.

When our group was allowed into the ICU, we found Li hallucinating that he was back in China. “You are against the Chinese Communist Party,” he shouted at invisible foes, tubes running into and out of his body. “Mafia! Mafia! I am going to destroy you! I am going to beat you all up!”

It was 2008 and prior to our trip Li’s responsibilities had included helping with the build-out for the upcoming Summer Olympics. Specifically, he was involved in relocating people to make space for new construction. Many of them had been unwilling to move and Li had led teams into neighborhoods to roust people from their homes. Wow , I thought to myself as Li hollered at the imaginary villagers. This guy is really devoted to the Party.

After a day, Li regained consciousness. Then a new round of worries set in. Under the rules then in place to limit the profligacy of these trips, Party officials were allowed only ten days on overseas “study tours.” In China, after a seven-hour bypass, a patient would be hospitalized for months. But we learned how different the US system was from China’s. The doctors told Li they’d discharge him within three days and he could return to Beijing in a week. No one on the delegation believed this would actually happen. “If he can do it, I will down a bottle of Moutai in one go,” one of the officials vowed. On the third day, Li was standing up and shaking the surgeon’s hand. I moved Li to the nearby W Hotel and for the next few days he held court from a lawn chair by its pool, ogling girls in bikinis. Within a week, we were flying back to Beijing.

I hadn’t known Li very well even though he was important to the success of the project. He ran the district’s planning and land department, and the airport project impacted both. Although, like the district chief, Li Ping, Li Yousheng was a local and had relatives scattered throughout Shunyi’s bureaucracy, he was from a different faction. From the start of the project, he’d always been cool to our plans.

Taking him to America was my way of trying to break the ice. We needed his help on several fronts, including demolishing villages to make way for more warehouses. He was integral to what we wanted to do. Still, I never imagined how much saving his life would change things.

The moment we returned to Beijing, we received a huge welcome from the whole district. Following that, each time I went into any government office, the first thing the leading official would declare was, “You are the benefactor of Shunyi!” Every meeting, every gathering, someone from Shunyi would mention Li Yousheng’s story.

Li saw me as his white knight. He was fifty then. Whenever I sat down to a meal with him, he placed me in the seat of honor. And for his whole gang, I became the guy. Li’s circle viewed me as the defender of Shunyi because I’d rescued a “big brother,” as his colleagues called him, from certain death in an alien land. And I’d given him “a new engine”—or at least a repaired heart—to boot. The negotiations over the project shifted. Discussions changed from “what are you going to do for me?” to “how do we solve this together?” It gave my staff far more space to maneuver. Li Ping’s departure became a distant memory.

Li Yousheng began inviting me to lunch with officials whose help I required. He tried to solve our problems on the spot. His message to his Party comrades was: “Let’s get this done.” And then he was promoted to executive district chief, which made things move even more smoothly. We’d become part of the Shunyi family.

Li’s case allowed me to come into my own and taught me what was required to make the project a success. Whitney ran interference for me from the top down. But I also needed to work hard to get things moving from the ground up. Saving Li’s life was proof that it was on me to build one-on-one relationships not with just Li but with a whole slew of middle-aged chain-smoking heavy drinkers who’d rarely left Shunyi.

I began showing up more at government offices in the district for meals. The routine was the same each time. I entered the dark, dank government offices a little after quitting time at 5:00. The staff had all gone home. The rooms were empty. I’d walk up stairs and down dark corridors illuminated by buzzing fluorescent lights. I’d push open a door and there, behind a haze of cigarette smoke, were my contacts, digging into a box of fruit from Shunyi’s orchards. We’d sit around and talk about nothing.

Being together with them for the sake of being together demonstrated that I was part of their group. I had to reacquaint myself with this kind of relationship. It was as if I were a boy back in Shanghai with my arms draped around my friends’ shoulders, gathering with people for no reason other than to bond with them, and doing it on a daily basis. The whole idea was to reinforce the sense of belonging.

This was critical in a system where the rules regarding what was legal and what was proscribed were full of vast areas of gray, and every time you wanted to accomplish anything you had to wade into the gray. In the West, laws are generally clear and courts are independent, so you know where the lines are. But in China, the rules were intentionally fuzzy, constantly changing, and always backdated. And the courts functioned as a tool of Party control. So that’s why building this sense of belonging was so crucial. To convince someone to venture into the gray zone with you, you first had to convince him or her to trust you. Only then could you take the leap together. To do that the two of you would research each other’s background, like Whitney had with Auntie Zhang. You’d talk to former colleagues and you’d spend hours cultivating each other so you could understand who each other really was. Auntie Zhang could vouch for Whitney and me on a macro level. But on the local level, it was up to me.

After an hour of chitchat, fruit, and cigarettes, we’d walk across the government compound to its canteen and file into a private dining room. There we’d find a dozen dishes arrayed on a table. There was so much food that we’d be lucky if we could down a quarter of it. Halfway into the meal the chef would come out and we’d either ask him to rustle up something special or cap the meal with noodles or dumplings.

The whole affair was lubricated with bottles of aged Moutai. As it had when I was in Hong Kong, the alcohol stripped away my natural reserve, and it brought me and these men closer. By the end of the evening, there I’d be holding hands with a fifty-something bureaucrat, cracking off-color jokes, and slapping him on the back.

I began to feel increasingly comfortable in this environment, talking about random topics like tea and fruit. I knew they were beginning to accept me, too, when one observed, “You don’t really seem like someone from Shanghai.” That was high praise. Northerners thought people from Shanghai were stingy, unmanly, and sneaky—in a word, Westernized.

I shed the paraphernalia that’d been imposed by Whitney to make me into a new man. Under her tutelage, I’d girded myself with the armor of a Chinese business executive. Glasses, Zegna suits, no flashy colors. But as the locals grew to accept me in backwater Shunyi, how I looked didn’t matter that much anymore. I started dressing casually. I rediscovered the love of style that I’d developed with my friend Steven in Hong Kong. I added flair to my wardrobe. My new friends in Shunyi joked about it, but if I’d dressed like they did, they’d have thought it strange anyway.

I spent about $300,000 on Li Yousheng’s medical expenses. A few years later, the Shunyi District government reimbursed me for about half. The money didn’t matter. The goodwill that experience bought was priceless.

In late spring of 2008, the airport finally acknowledged that the ex–general manager Li Peiying was under investigation. He’d been held for a year and a half without charges. That announcement opened the way for the appointment of a new airport general manager who could sign for the joint venture’s loans. After saving a life, reaping the Ping An windfall, and regaining access to funding, I looked forward to shifting the project to a higher gear.





