AFTERWORD


IN AUGUST 2017, A FRIEND came to the apartment I used to share with Whitney to pick up Ariston and take him home to England after a summer with his mom. Whitney came downstairs to say goodbye. As a car waited outside to whisk them to the airport, Whitney offered a wan smile. “I am the body that delivered him into the world,” she said. “Now he’s going to go on without me.”

It’s hard to say whether Whitney had any premonition that she’d soon disappear. If she had, she probably would’ve better arranged her affairs or tried to protect herself. Still, that lonely image of a woman handing over her son stuck with me. Did Whitney sense that they were coming for her? So many thousands of people had been caught up in Xi Jinping’s anti-corruption drive. Whitney faced a travel ban. She didn’t seem to take it seriously. But by the time she’d told me about the ban several months earlier, we’d long since stopped talking as honestly as we once had.

Might things have been different if I’d tried harder to remain in her life as a sympathetic ear and trusted counselor, if not a husband? I can’t help wondering. After I’d moved out and we’d divorced in 2015, Whitney lost the one person in the world with whom she’d shared everything. Yes, she had other close relationships. But no one read her like I once could. She rode a wild ambition. She dreamed big and went for it all. I often stopped her from doing things that seemed too dangerous or risky. But once we split up, she lost her sounding board, her guardrail, and perhaps her caution, too. When she was grabbed from her new office in the Bulgari hotel complex that we’d built, I tried all my contacts in China, but nobody had any answers.

I’ve heard rumors. A leading Chinese economist told me he believes that Whitney was drugged, probably beaten, and, if she ever emerges alive, the Communist secret police will inject something into her spine that will turn her into a walking zombie. If she comes out, he said, she’ll never be the same. The Chinese businessman turned dissident Guo Wengui announced that Party authorities had killed her, but he’s a gossip and his allegations rarely hold. Even the New York Times reporter David Barboza, in an attempt to get me to talk, passed along rumors that Whitney was dead. Part of me thinks that one reason she hasn’t appeared is that she’s refused to admit guilt. She always used to say, “If you pulled my corpse out of my coffin and whipped it, you’d still find no dirt.” Whitney is (or was) as strongheaded as they come.

Whitney’s disappearance cemented my evolving view of Communist China. I was raised to love China and the Party. Patriotism came naturally to me, as it did to many of my generation. From the days when I hoarded comic books detailing the exploits of Communist revolutionaries, I’d unconsciously committed to the cause of making China great again. Studying in the United States in the late 1980s, I waived the right to get an American green card so that I could hew my path in Greater China. In Beijing in the 2000s, I devoted myself literally to building the capital—vastly improving the airport and constructing what is arguably the nation’s finest hotel and office complex.

But what type of system allows for extralegal kidnappings of the type that befell Whitney Duan? What type of system gives investigators the right to disappear people and not even inform their parents or their son? Obviously, Ariston misses his mother, but what is torturing him and all of us is not knowing what has happened to her. Where is Whitney Duan? Is she even alive?

China has rules for how suspects should be treated. Its 1997 Criminal Procedure Law allows the police to hold a suspect for up to thirty-seven days before either releasing or formally arresting him or her. But that’s a cruel joke. Whitney has been gone for years and still not a peep.

Also calling into question the system’s essential morality is the Party’s opaque mechanism for investigating its members. The process is run by the Central Discipline Inspection Commission. In 1994, the Party instituted an investigative system called shuanggui that allows investigators to hold people suspected of violating Party regulations. But shuanggui is not limited by any law. Technically, detentions can last forever. I believe Whitney is being held under that structure. Again, what type of system allows a political party to operate above the law and keep its suspects incommunicado for years? Whitney isn’t the only one suffering this fate, but she’s the longest-held captive without a sound.

My views on China began to sour in 2008 during the second term of Party boss Hu Jintao and Premier Wen Jiabao. The logic of China’s Leninist system, essentially unchanged since the days of Chairman Mao Zedong, demands that the Party seek total control. Only in times of crisis does the Party loosen its grip, allowing more free enterprise and more freedom. It always does so reluctantly and then reverts to form. From 2008 on, the Party began re-exerting its control—over the economy, the media, the Internet, and the educational system. Editors were sacked, publishers were arrested, professors were fired, the Internet was censored, and Party committees were forced on all private businesses. China’s growing economy presented the Party with an opportunity to reassert its dominance.

I concluded that the Party’s honeymoon with entrepreneurs like Whitney and me was little more than a Leninist tactic, born in the Bolshevik Revolution, to divide the enemy in order to annihilate it. Alliances with businessmen were temporary as part of the Party’s goal of total societal control. Once we were no longer needed—to build the economy, invest overseas, or help restrict freedoms in Hong Kong—we, too, would become the enemy.

China was moving in this illiberal direction long before Xi Jinping took power in 2012. Xi has simply accelerated the process. Not only has he maneuvered the Party to maximize its control inside China, he also has pushed the Party to export China’s repressive system overseas. This, too, conforms to the logic of China’s system. As its capability increases, the Chinese Communist Party will seek to defend itself in an ever-expanding sphere. We see this in Hong Kong with the passage in 2020 of the national security law, which, although purposely vague, effectively outlaws comments criticizing the Hong Kong government by anyone anywhere. Talk about imperial overreach.

There’s a lie perpetrated by the Chinese Communist Party that it prioritizes the collective over the selfish interests of the individual. Many in the West, unhappy with the West’s obsession with individual rights, buy into this fantasy that the Chinese Communist Party focuses on the common good. The reality is that the Party’s main purpose is to serve the interests of the sons and daughters of its revolutionaries. They are the primary beneficiaries; they are the ones sitting at the nexus of economic and political power.

Thirty years ago, my parents brought me out of a communist state to Hong Kong. I grew up and studied in a liberal, capitalist, Western-oriented culture, learning the possibility and the value of human potential. Starting in the late 1970s, when the Chinese Communist Party gave everyone a breather so it could recover from its own disastrous mistakes, it opened the window a crack and allowed the world to imagine what a freer, more open China could be. Whitney and I squeezed ourselves through this crack and seized a unique opportunity—one that gave us the chance to extend ourselves, realize our dreams, and build China, too.

Now that the Chinese Communist Party has the resources, it’s back to showing its true colors. At the same time, I’ve come to realize that, more than wealth or professional success, basic dignity and human rights are life’s most precious gifts. I want to live in a society that shares that ideal. So I’ve chosen the Western world over China—not only for me, but also for my son.







