诱人和不那么诱人的愚人问题




那些在饭馆里争吵的夫妇，生活中最令人沮丧的一面是，他们几乎永远意识不到自己争吵的真正主题是什么。

给别人提出最多建议的，正是那些最不成功的人，特别是在写作和财务方面。

流言只有被否认的时候才有价值。

长期来看，你更容易愚弄自己而不是别人。

世上有两类人：追求胜利的人和追求在争论中得胜的人。他们从来不是同一拨人。

人们道歉经常是为了将来再作同样的道歉。

数学之于知识，好比义肢之于真正的肢体；有些人截肢就是为了能装上义肢。

现代生活会用愚人的方式解释各种行为：现在我们“散步锻炼”，而不是毫无理由地“散步”。

社会媒体严重反社会，健康食品非常不健康，知识工作者极度缺乏知识，社会科学根本就不是科学。

对于许多人，我们不应该在他们死去时寻找“死亡原因”，而是在他们活着时寻找“活着的原因”。

那些利用别人的人，在被人利用时最为恼火。

如果有人给你好几个理由说明他为什么想得到这份工作，不要雇用他。

二流思维方式的失败之处是：他告诉你一个秘密，想让你保守这个秘密，而他的行为刚好证明了他自己都没法保守它。

社交网站会注明人们“喜欢”哪些东西，然而如果注明他们讨厌哪些东西的话，信息量就会更加丰富。

人们太过重视因果逻辑，所以如果你在谈话中不时插入一句“为什么”，就可以让最沉默寡言的人变得多嘴多舌。

我得经常提醒自己，真正的独立思考者看上去可能像个会计。





CHARMING AND LESS CHARMING SUCKER PROBLEMS





The most depressing aspect of the lives of the couples you watch surreptitiously arguing in restaurants is that they are almost always unaware of the true subject of argument.

It seems that it is the most unsuccessful people who give the most advice, particularly for writing and financial matters.

Rumors are only valuable when they are denied.

Over the long term, you are more likely to fool yourself than others.

There are two types of people: those who try to win and those who try to win arguments. They are never the same.

People usually apologize so they can do it again.

Mathematics is to knowledge what an artificial hand is to the real one; some amputate to replace.

Modernity inflicts a sucker narrative on activities; now we "walk for exercise" , not "walk" with no justification; for hidden reasons.

Social media are severely antisocial, health foods are empirically unhealthy, knowledge workers are very ignorant, and social sciences aren't scientific at all.

For so many, instead of looking for "cause of death" when they expire, we should be looking for "cause of life" when they are still around.

It is those who use others who are the most upset when someone uses them.

If someone gives you more than one reason why he wants the job, don't hire him.

Failure of second-order thinking: he tells you a secret and somehow expects you to keep it, when he just gave you evidence that he can't keep it himself.

Social networks present information about what people like; more informative if, instead, they described what they don't like.

People are so prone to overcausation that you can make the reticent turn loquacious by dropping an occasional "why?" in the conversation.

I need to keep reminding myself that a truly independent thinker may look like an accountant.





