隐含的和明显的


当人们注意你的缺席胜过别人的在场时，你就知道自己的影响力了。

如果有人宣称“永不再做”某件事情，那他肯定会再做一次。

有些沉默寡言的人之所以沉默，是为了掩藏自己的智慧；但绝大多数都是为了掩藏自己缺乏智慧的事实。

当有人说“我没那么蠢”时，往往意味着他比自己想象的更蠢。

辱骂是唯一一种绝不可能造假的欣赏方式。

当女人说男人聪明时，她通常是说他长得帅；当男人说女人笨时，他肯定是说她长得漂亮。

绝大多数婚配网站无法理解的是，人们对自己说不出口的东西更感兴趣。

你通常宁愿跟那些认为你有趣的人在一起，而不是跟你认为有趣的人在一起。

网络打破了私人领域跟公众领域之间的壁垒，过去那些私下里咕哝的脏话现在成了流行语。

社交网站的问题之一在于，别人想在你背后埋怨你越来越难了。

如果有人对你说“我做不了别的什么了”，那他肯定可以帮助你，但是不愿意这么做。如果他说“我来帮你”，那他肯定既没法帮助你，也不愿意这么做。

我们知道商品肯定比推销手册上描述的差，但我们却没法容忍人们表现得比他们留给我们的第一印象差。

如果有人讲话时以“简单地说”开头，那他谈论的很可能是非常复杂的事情。

一半人用嘴唇说谎，另一半人用眼泪说谎。





THE IMPLICIT AND THE EXPLICIT




You know you have influence when people start noticing your absence more than the presence of others.



You are guaranteed a repetition when you hear the declaration "never again".

Some reticent people use silence to conceal their intelligence; but most do so to hide the lack of it.

When someone says "I am not that stupid", it often means that he is more stupid than he thinks.

Bad-mouthing is the only genuine, never faked, expression of admiration.

When a woman says about a man that he is intelligent, she often means handsome; when a man says about a woman that she is dumb, he always means attractive.

What organized dating sites fail to understand is that people are far more interesting in what they don't say about themselves.

For company, you often prefer those who find you interesting over those you find interesting.

The internet broke the private-public wall; impulsive and inelegant utterances that used to be kept private are now available for literal interpretation.

One of the problems with social networks is that it is getting harder and harder for others to complain about you behind your back.

You can be certain that a person has the means but not the will to help you when he says "there is nothing else I can do". And you can be certain that a person has neither means nor will to help you when he says "I am here to help".

We expect places and products to be less attractive than in marketing brochures, but we never forgive humans for being worse than their first impressions.

When someone starts a sentence with "simply", you should expect to hear something very complicated.

Half the people lie with their lips; the other half with their tears.





