Federalist 21

p. 135. if the malcontents had been headed by aCaesar…: Gaius Julius Caesar (100–44 BC) was a Roman soldier and populist statesman whose assassination precipitated a civil war that led to the establishment of the Roman empire. The scion of aristocratic families, Caesar held a number of high posts in Roman government, before assuming, with the help of Pompey and Crassus, the supreme office of consul (60 BC). From 58 to 51 BC, he conquered Gaul, in the process amassing great wealth and inciting the jealousy of the Senate. In order to avoid the possibility of recall to Rome for prosecution (on charges of abuse of power), Caesar marched back into Italy at the head of his army. He encountered little resistance and soon defeated his former ally Pompey. After subduing forces loyal to the republic in Egypt and elsewhere, he returned to Rome in 44 BC as dictator, and, by February, perpetual dictator. On the fifteenth of March, a group of Senators assassinated him in the name of the Republic.

p. 135. or by aCromwell: The reference is to Oliver Cromwell (1599–1658), an English soldier and statesman. As a Member of Parliament (1628–1629 and 1640–1653), he acquired a reputation as a resolute Puritan and an enemy of the established church. A captain of cavalry at the outbreak of the English Civil War (1642), he soon distinguished himself in battle and assumed a decisive and highly efficacious role in all military operations for the Parliamentary forces. When the Parliamentary party split, he took the side of the minority Independents against the aristocratic Presbyterians and advocated a more vigorous prosecution of the war. He successfully remodeled the army according to principles of strict self-discipline and religious fervor. After the execution of Charles I and abolition of the monarchy (1649), he was named Chairman of the Council of State of the new Commonwealth. With extreme severity, he quelled royalist uprisings in Ireland and Scotland, and, after the adoption of the Instrument of Government (1653), accepted the title of Lord Protector of the united kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland. Despite repeated squabbles with Parliament and an increasingly tyrannical style of government, he managed to conduct coherent foreign policy, increasing English power and prestige abroad while insuring prosperity at home. For his role in the execution of the king, he was posthumously attainted(1660), disinterred, and hanged.

