Federalist 52

p. 324. anterior to the date ofMagna Charta…: Magna Carta is a written confirmation of the liberties of English subjects, approved under baronial duress by King John at Runnymede in 1215. By the mid-thirteenth century, the document was already regarded as the foundation of English liberties and has since come to symbolize the principle of limited government. Although John violated the charter soon after he signed it, it was reissued several times after his death, entering the statute book in final form in 1225.

p. 325. On the accession ofWilliam III…: William of Orange (1650–1702), the Stadtholder (from 1672) of the United Provinces, became king of Great Britain in 1689. The son of Mary, the eldest daughter of Charles I of England, he married (1677) his cousin, Mary, the daughter of James II. In what later became known as the Glorious Revolution of 1688, he was invited to England to replace James II. Although the change in regime was initially bloodless, support from the French under Louis XIV enabled James to mount a challenge the following year. At the battle of the Boyne (1690), however, William gained a decisive victory. William died without male heirs, and the crown passed to Mary’s sister Anne.

p. 325. whena revolution took place in the government…: The reference is to the Glorious Revolution of 1688 in which James II was replaced by William of Orange and James’s Protestant daughter, Mary. The event marks the final triumph of English parliamentarians over royal absolutism. James’s Catholicism and the birth, in 1685, of a Catholic male heir, catalyzed competing Whigs and Tories into united opposition. Parliamentary leaders offered the crown to William under the conditions that he and his successors acknowledge the rights of their subjects, the supremacy of Parliament, and the Protestant succession. The conditions were accepted—later embodied in the English Bill of Rights—and William and Mary were crowned as joint rulers in 1689.

p. 325. The Parliament which commenced withGeorge II…: George II (1683–1760) was king of Great Britain and Ireland (from 1727) and Elector of Hanover. Although born in Germany, he was more engaged in British affairs than his father, George I, had been. During his reign, supporters of Prince Charles, the Stuart pretender to the throne (Jacobites), were finally crushed at the battle of Culloden (1746), the foundation of empire was laid in India, and Britain entered the Seven Years’ War (called by Americans the French and Indian War) against France.

