Federalist 6

p. 49. The celebratedPericles…: Pericles (c. 495–429 BC) was an Athenian statesman and orator. He began his public career about 470 BC as the leader of the democratic party and gained popularity by sponsoring measures providing theatrical productions at public expense and depriving the aristocratic Areopagus of its judicial power (461). After 444 BC, Pericles was the undisputed leader of democratic Athens. He expanded Athenian influence by conquering (440 BC) Samos and founding colonies throughout the Greek world. He conducted an enormous program of public building that included the construction of the Parthenon. He sought to increase Athenian naval and strategic resources and to make Athens impervious to land power. This policy antagonized Sparta, which organized a league against Athens and her allies and tributaries. Pericles died of the plague that swept Athens during the third year of the Peloponnesian War (431–404 BC).

p. 49. in compliance with the resentment of aprostitute…: Publius refers to Aspasia, the mistress of Pericles from about 445 BC. She is reputed to have taught rhetoric and to have conversed with Socrates. Her influence over Pericles became the subject of comic aspersion and is discussed by the Greek biographer Plutarch (AD 46–120), in his Parallel Lives (See Plutarch’s Life of Pericles, XXIV.)

p. 49. and destroyed the city of theSamnians: The Samnians were inhabitants of the Greek island of Samos near Asia Minor. Samos first emerges in history with the maritime tyranny of Polycrates (c. 535 BC), from whose regime the philosopher Pythagoras fled to Italy. After a period of Persian domination, Samos became a prominent member of Athens’s Delian League, but revolted in 440 BC. Under Pericles’s leadership, Athens suppressed the revolt, installed Athenian settlers, and made Samos a simple tributary.

p. 49. stimulated by private pique against theMegarensians…: The Megarensians (Megarians) were inhabitants of an ancient Greek city located between Athens and Corinth on a narrow and mountainous strip of land commanding two routes between the Peloponnese and central Greece. Because of its strategic importance and relatively poor position, Megara was always dominated by powerful neighbors. In the aftermath of the Persian Wars (492–479 BC), when Athens and Sparta vied for leadership of the Greek city-states, Megara switched allegiances several times. The city sided finally with Sparta when Pericles’s Megarian Decree barred Megarian commerce from the harbors of the Delian League. The decree would have ruined Megara economically and was understood at the time (although Thucydides disagrees) to have precipitated the Peloponnesian War (431–404 BC).

p. 49. in a supposed theft of the statuary ofPhidias…. Phidias (c. 465–425 BC) was the Athenian sculptor who directed many of Pericles’s public improvements. His reputation as the greatest sculptor of antiquity rests on his gold and ivory statues of Athena at the Parthenon and Zeus at Olympia.

p. 49. that famous and fatal war, distinguished…by the name of thePeloponnesian war: For twenty-seven years—between 431 and 404 BC—Sparta and Athens, together with their respective allies and tributaries, struggled for supremacy in Greece. Although Athens entered the war as a dominant naval power, years of warfare and several disastrous campaigns exhausted her resources. Sparta triumphed more by endurance than superiority of strategy or power, but both sides suffered enormous losses.

p. 49. terminated in the ruin ofthe Athenian commonwealth: One of the leading cities of ancient Greece, Athens emerged from its legendary beginnings as a typical seventh-century BC aristocracy. Civil strife between rich and poor led to the legal reforms of Solon in the early sixth century. These fostered the growth of commerce and population, but social problems continued until a period of tyranny weakened the power of the aristocracy sufficiently to enable Cleisthenes, in 510 BC, to introduce a basic democracy. During the following century, Athenian democracy matured, reaching its apogee—with an unparalleled flowering of philosophy, art, and literature—under the leadership of Pericles. In the wake of Athens’s earlier success against Persia’s expansionistic designs, Pericles encouraged the Athenians to build an empire of their own. The consequent growth of Athenian power antagonized Sparta and led finally to the disastrous Peloponnesian War and to the end of Athens’s golden age.

p. 49. The ambitious cardinal, who was prime minister toHenry VIII…: The "ambitious cardinal" is Thomas Wolsey (1471–1530), who from 1515 until 1529 was lord chancellor of England and the chief minister of Henry VIII. In 1523, he was appointed legate to Rome, but when he failed to win papal consent to Henry’s divorce from Catherine of Aragon he fell from the king’s favor. He was sentenced for illegal dealings with Rome, pardoned by Henry, and then charged again—this time with treason—when he died in 1530. Henry VIII (1491–1547) was king of England from 1509. While intermittent conflict with France dominated the first part of Henry’s reign, English domestic affairs rose to the fore during the second part. Designated "Defender of the Faith"(1521) by Pope Leo X for his writings against Martin Luther and the Protestant movement, Henry nevertheless fell afoul of the Catholic church when he sought, with Wolsey’s help, to annul his marriage to Catherine, who failed to give him a male heir. He was secretly married to Anne Boleyn in 1533, and his consequent excommunication by the church led to passage of the Act of Supremacy, creation of the Church of England, and the very lucrative state confiscation of monastic property. By sponsoring the English reformation and by ruthlessly defending his position at the head of the English church, Henry accelerated the centralization of governmental power in the crown. He was succeeded by his son, Edward VI.

p. 49. by the influence of theEmperor Charles V: Charles V (1500–1558) ruled the Holy Roman Empire from 1519 to 1556. Born in Belgium, he became joint ruler of Spain (as Charles I) with his mother, Joanna, in 1517. His election to the imperial throne marked the beginning of a rivalry with Francis I of France and an effort to check the progress of Protestantism in Europe—two developments that were to dominate European affairs throughout the first half of the sixteenth century. He retired two years before his death and divided the empire between his son, Philip II of Spain, and his brother, Emperor Ferdinand I.

p. 50. The influence which thebigotry of one female, thepetulancies of another, and thecabals of a third, had in the contemporary policy…: The "bigotry of one female" refers to Françoise d’Aubigné (1635–1719), Marquise de Maintenon, the second wife of Louis XIV of France. She was selected initially as the governess of one of Louis’s sons (1670), but her influence over the king gradually increased, and she was secretly married to him in 1685. Her "bigotry" alludes to her tireless efforts to persuade Louis to persecute the French Protestants, known as Huguenots. The "petulancies of another" refers to Sarah Churchill née Jennings (1660–1744), Duchess of Marlborough. Brought up with the princess Anne, whose favor she long enjoyed, Jennings exercised a profound influence over her politically ambitious husband, John Churchill, first Duke of Marlborough. After Anne became queen (1702), Sarah is said to have dominated both the household and the ministry. Her political influence ceased in 1711, when she was replaced as confidante by the Queen’s cousin, Mrs. Abigail Masham. "The cabals of a third" refers to Jeanne Antoinette Poisson (1721–1764), Marquise de Pompadour, mistress of Louis XV of France. She was said to have inveigled Louis XV into the alliance with Austria that plunged France into the Seven Years War (1756–63).

p. 50. IfShayshad not been a desperate debtor…. Daniel Shays (1740–1825) was an officer of the Revolution who led the rebellion (1786) that bears his name. The rebels were financially beleaguered Massachusetts farmers who hoped to shut the courts in order to prevent action against debtors and to force the state legislature to lower taxes and to issue paper money. At the height of the rebellion, Shays and 1200 followers attempted to seize the federal arsenal at Springfield, but the rebels were poorly armed and finally defeated by the state militia. Although it caused little damage, Shays’s Rebellion helped to persuade the states that the Confederation was powerless to protect itself from violent insurrection, and that the preservation of law and order necessitated a more energetic national government.

p. 51. Spartawas little better than a well-regulated camp…: This ancient Greek city in the Peloponnesus was the capital of the territory of Laconia. Known for its legendary regimentation and military prowess, Sparta depended for its survival on state-owned slaves—the Helots—who outnumbered Spartan citizens by as much as ten to one. After defeating Athens in the Peloponnesian War (404 BC), Sparta briefly became the hegemonic power of Greece.

p. 51. andRomewas never sated of carnage and conquest: Although initially ruled by kings, in 509 BC the city expelled the last king and established a republic, which grew in the following centuries to include most of the Italian peninsula. Upon the defeat of Carthage (201 BC), Rome was unchallenged in the western Mediterranean, and within an additional fifty years the eastern Mediterranean also fell under Rome’s dominion. This spectacular territorial expansion placed inordinate strains on the old republican regime, which finally gave way, after 27 BC, to the Roman Empire. Imperial Rome continued to expand, eventually including most of present-day western Europe in addition to much territory in North Africa and the Middle East.

p. 51. Carthage,though a commercial republic, was the aggressor…: Carthage was an ancient city-state in North Africa, located near the site of modern Tunis. It was founded by Phoenicians in the mid-ninth century BC and finally destroyed by the Romans at the conclusion of the Third Punic War in 146 BC.

p. 51. Hannibalhad carried her arms into the heart of Italy…: Hannibal (247–183 BC) was a Carthaginian general. In the course of subjugating several Spanish tribes, the young leader attacked Saguntum (219), an ally of Rome, thereby initiating the Second Punic War. Then, in what is considered one of the most remarkable military accomplishments of antiquity, he led an army of 100,000 men (including elephants) over the Alps into northern Italy. The hardships of the expedition reduced the number of men at his command, but Hannibal managed through intelligence and skill to vanquish much larger Roman armies, and to force the Romans into an unaccustomed defensive posture. In 216, at Cannae, he routed and almost annihilated a Roman army of 90,000, but for reasons that remain unclear he neglected to advance on the defenseless city. Ever resilient, Rome recovered and gradually wore down Hannibal’s resources. By 203 BC, the threat of a Roman army under Scipio Africanus Major forced Hannibal to return to North Africa for the defense of Carthage. At the battle of Zama (202 BC), Scipio was victorious and Carthage accepted Roman terms. Having earned the fear and enmity of Carthaginians as well as Romans, Hannibal was forced into exile, and he eventually took his own life to avoid falling into Roman hands.

p. 52. beforeScipio, in turn, gave him an overthrow in the territories of Carthage…: Scipio Africanus Major (approximately 234–183 BC) was a Roman general during the Second Punic War. As a young military tribune, he took part in the disastrous Roman loss to Hannibal at Cannae, and despite his age was appointed leader of the surviving troops. In 205, he was elected consul at Rome—although under the legal age—and decided, against senatorial opposition, to carry the war with Carthage into Africa. When the senate refused to grant an army for this purpose, Scipio called for volunteers. With these he invaded Africa in 204 and by several small victories forced the Carthaginians to recall Hannibal from his nearly unopposed devastation of Italy. At the battle of Zama in 202 BC, Scipio gained a decisive victory, and Carthage was forced to surrender. In 190, he again took the field for Rome, this time against Antiochus III of Syria, whom he quickly defeated. Despite his success, or perhaps because of it, Scipio and his brother were accused of accepting bribes from the Syrian king. The scandal caused Scipio to leave Rome forever. He died at Liternum, in 183.

p. 52. Venice,in later times, figured more than once in wars of ambition…: A coastal city in northeastern Italy, Venice was founded by refugees from the Lombard invasions in the fifth century AD. With a favorable position on the Adriatic, Venice came to dominate the sea routes to the Holy Land and thereby gained enormous power and wealth from the Crusades. The chief executive of the city, known as the Doge, derived his authority from the people, but until the twelfth century suffrage was severely limited. By 1160, in response to the burdens created by increasing territory and a growing economy, the city had adopted a republican form of government. This consisted of a Great Council of Forty-five (handling all political and administrative matters), a Doge (acting as a servant of the state rather than as a monarch), a Minor Council of Six (acting alongside the Doge), and various individual magistrates (to deal with judicial and administrative matters). Around 1300, Venice restricted participation in government to families that had previously performed the duties of magistrates. Fears of the resulting concentration of power led soon afterwards to the formation of the Council of Ten(1310), which was intended to defend the existing regime. By the sixteenth century, Venice had become a virtual oligarchy, and political stagnation combined with the expansion of the Ottoman Empire and the discovery of the New World brought about a steady decline in Venetian status. After brief periods under French and then Austrian rule, Venice became part of modern Italy in 1866.

p. 52. till, becoming an object to the other Italian states, PopeJulius the Secondfound means…: Julius II (1443–1513) was pope from 1503. An aggressive champion of Church interests, he drove Cesare Borgia from the Romagna and organized an alliance with France and Germany against Venice. Realizing that the French posed a greater threat than the Venetians, he made peace with the latter (1510) and personally took the field against the former. In 1512, with the help now of Swiss and Spanish troops, he succeeded in ridding Italy of the French, but immediately faced the peril of conciliating these new friends. His death in 1513 precluded any further adjustments. Julius was a great patron of the arts. He sponsored work by Michelangelo and Raphael, among others, and initiated the design and construction of St. Peter’s Cathedral (1506).

p. 52. to accomplishthat formidable league, which gave a deadly blow to…this haughty republic: Publius refers to the League of Cambrai, an alliance between the Holy Roman Emperor, the king of Aragon, the king of France, and the pope, formed for the purpose of conquering and dividing the territory of the republic of Venice. The league was short-lived (1508–1510) and only partly successful. In 1510, the pope withdrew and formed the Holy League, this time siding with Venice, Aragon, and the emperor against France.

p. 52. The provinces ofHolland, till they were overwhelmed in debts and taxes….: Lying on the frontier between the Holy Roman Empire and the kingdom of France, Holland and its neighboring Low Countries developed along lines distinct from these much greater powers. Between the eleventh and thirteenth centuries, the cities of the Netherlands wrestled charters of municipal privileges from their respective feudal lords and became powerful commercial centers. But by the end of the fifteenth century, the Netherlands had fallen under the rule of the Hapsburgs. Cruel repression at the hands of the Spanish agents of the Hapsburg sovereign hardened opposition in the seven northern provinces even as the ten southern provinces acquiesced. This split between north and south, reinforced by the spread of Calvinism among the city-dwellers of the north, became permanent and resulted finally in the birth of two modern states: the United Provinces of the Netherlands(1581) and Belgium (1830).

p. 52. that memorable struggle for superiority between the rivalhouses of Austria and Bourbon…: Bourbon is the name of a French royal family founded in 1272 by Robert, Count of Clermont. The kings of France from 1589 (Henry IV) until 1793 (Louis XVI) and from 1814 to 1830; of Spain (intermittently, from 1700 until 1931 and again after 1975); of Naples (1735–1805); and of the Two Sicilies (1815–1860) were all of Bourbon stock. The phrase "house of Austria," refers to one branch of the house of Hapsburg, a family that produced European monarchs from the thirteenth to the twentieth centuries. In 1273, Rudolf of Hapsburg (the name originally attached to the family castle in Switzerland) was elected king of the Germans. He acquired Austria in 1282 as an hereditary possession. Hapsburgs ruled as kings of Germany and Austria until 1452, when Frederick II was crowned Holy Roman Emperor, a title that remained with the family until Napoleon conquered the empire in 1806. The Hapsburgs were at the peak of their power in the sixteenth century, when a single member of the family, Charles V, laid claim to Spain (as Charles I) and to the Holy Roman Empire. At Charles’s death the Spanish and Austrian branches of the family diverged.

p. 52. seconding the ambition, or rather the avarice, ofa favorite leader…: The "favorite leader" is the English general John Churchill (1650–1722), first Duke of Marlborough. After successful military service in campaigns against the Dutch (1672–1678), he became the favorite and confidant of the Duke of York. When the latter acceded to the English throne (as James II, in 1685), he was raised to the peerage. Meanwhile, his wife had achieved a thorough influence over the king’s daughter Princess Anne. Despite openly pledging loyalty to the king in late 1688, Churchill secretly committed himself to William of Orange, who, as William III, replaced James after the Glorious Revolution (1688). William showed his gratitude by making Churchill Earl of Marlborough. He was disgraced on account of accusations of treasonous intrigues with the former king in 1692, but returned to military command four years later. With the accession of Queen Anne (1702) and the outbreak of the War of the Spanish Succession (1701–1714), Marlborough took advantage of numerous opportunities to display his remarkable military and diplomatic talents, but his wife’s fall from grace at court, and the ascendancy of the Tories in 1710, cast a second shadow of disgrace over his accomplishments. Under George I, whose reign began in 1714, he was restored to power for the last time.

p. 53. the attempts of the English merchants to prosecute an illicit trade withthe Spanish Main: The portion of the mainland of South America bordering the Caribbean Sea between the mouth of the Orinoco River in Venezuela and the Isthmus of Panama was known, during the period of discovery and colonization of the New World, as the Spanish Main. The phrase also refers generally to the pirate-infested route taken by Spanish galleons delivering gold from the New World to Spain.

p. 53. Many of the English…were sent to dig in themines of Potosi: Potosi is a city in southern Bolivia, high in the Andes mountains, known in the eighteenth century for its rich silver mines (opened in 1545). The mistreatment of British nationals by Spaniards trying to enforce restrictions on trade with Spanish colonies led to the War of Jenkin’s Ear (1739–1743) which merged with the War of the Austrian Succession (known in America as King George’s War, 1743–1748) but resulted in no significant territorial changes.

p. 54. therevoltof a part of the State of North Carolina, thelate menacing disturbancesin Pennsylvania: In 1784, the inhabitants of four western counties of North Carolina proclaimed their secession as a separate state called Franklin. By late 1787, North Carolina’s implacable opposition, combined with internal strains within Franklin, led to the seceding counties’ reunification with North Carolina. Meanwhile, in Pennsylvania, discontented inhabitants of the Wyoming Valley (in northeastern Pennsylvania near New York) attempted a similar secession in 1787. By the time of Federalist No. 6’s appearance in the newspapers (November 14, 1787), the Pennsylvania legislature had approved the governor’s request to call out the militia in order to suppress the revolt.

p. 54. An intelligent writerexpresses himself on this subject…: The reference is to Gabriel Bonnet, L’Abbé de Mably (1709–1785), a French historian and writer on the law of nations and the quotation is from his tome Des Principes des Negociations, pour servir d’introduction au Droit Public de l’Europe, fonde sur les Traites (1757). The author of Parallels between the Romans and the French (1740), Phocian Dialogue (1763), and Observations on the History of Greece (1766), among numerous other works, Mably was a contemporary and a sometime friend of the French philosophes.

