Federalist 38

p. 228. Minos…was the primitive founder of the government of Crete…: Minos was a legendary king of Crete, an island in the Aegean to the southeast of Greece. It was the center of the Bronze Age Minoan civilization (2500–1100 BC) and exerted a profound influence on the more primitive peoples of the eastern Mediterranean, including the Mycenaean Greeks described by Homer. Minos supposedly lived three generations before the Trojan War (roughly 1350 BC). According to one tradition, he was the son of Zeus and Europa, whom Zeus, in the form of a bull, had carried off from Tyre or Sidon. To the ancient Greeks generally(e.g. Homer, Hesiod, Strabo), Minos was the most royal of earthly kings. Together with his brother, Rhadamanthys, he gave the first laws to mankind and acted as judge of the living and the dead. In Attic legend, however, he was a cruel despot, demanding from Athens an annual tribute of seven youths to be sacrificed to the half-man, half-bull Minotaur.

p. 228. asZaleucuswas…: Perhaps the earliest lawgiver among the Greeks (c. 650 BC), Zaleucus was connected particularly with the Greek colonists of Locri in Italy. He was known (like Draco) for the severity of his laws which, although designed to pacify social unrest, were probably more aristocratic than those of the great Athenian reformer, Solon.

p. 228. of that ofthe Locrians: These were inhabitants of a Greek colony in southern Italy (Locri Epizephyrii) dating from the seventh century BC. Locri, which was known for the law code of Zaleucus, was governed by a hereditary oligarchy. During the third century BC, Locri was allied with various enemies of Rome—first Pyrrhus, then Hannibal—but eventually became a Roman municipium; that is, a city whose inhabitants shared the military and financial burdens of Roman citizenship without the benefit of the franchise.

p. 228. Theseusfirst, and after himDracoandSolon…: Theseus was a hero of Attica (the region surrounding Athens) and, according to legend, the founder of Athens. He was the son of Aegeus and a cousin of Hercules. Of numerous exploits, he is best known for slaying the Minotaur in Minos’s Labyrinth, defeating the Amazons, and attempting to carry off Persephone from the underworld. He is credited with the unification of the towns of Attica under the headship of the city of Athens and with the establishment of some of Athens’ most essential institutions, including the Prytaneum (hall for state receptions), the Boule (legislative council), and the festival of the Panathenaea. Theseus divided Athenian society into three classes—nobles, artisans, and farmers—and laid the groundwork for the democratic institutions of the classical period. Little is known of Draco, but according to tradition, he was the first (about 621 BC) to fix Athenian law in written form. His penalties were very severe. Solon (c. 638–c. 559 BC), the Athenian lawgiver and poet, left more evidence of his influence on Athenian politics. As chief magistrate of Athens during the economic crisis of 594 BC, Solon instituted reforms annulling existing debts, ending the practice of enslavement for nonpayment of debts, restricting exports, and regularizing the currency. He also democratized the Athenian constitution, opening the position of archon (chief magistrate) to a larger segment of the citizen class, and allowing the popular assembly to reject measures adopted by the council. He removed the capital punishments ordained by Draco for all crimes, allowing them only for the crime of murder. Although many Athenians urged him to accept the title of king, he refused and, upon securing the adoption of his reforms, left Athens for a period of ten years. He was known in the ancient world as a man of surpassing wisdom, one of the Seven Sages of ancient Greece.

p. 228. The foundation of the original government of Rome was laid byRomulus…: Romulus was the legendary founder and first king of Rome. Scholars disagree on the antiquity of the myth, its meaning, and conclusion, but its basic outlines are well-settled: Romulus and Remus were foundlings, raised by a she-wolf. As young men, the brothers founded a city on the Palatine hill. After killing Remus for defying his authority, Romulus proceeded to insure the growth of the city by offering asylum to fugitives and by stealing wives from the neighboring Sabines. Eventually, Romulus disappeared in a storm and became the god Quirinus, a peaceful double of Mars, responsible for the political and military organization of Rome.

p. 228. the work completed by two of his elective successors,Numa…: Numa Pompilius (traditionally 715–673 BC) was, according to legend, the second king of Rome. A Sabine in origin, Numa is said to have instituted the fundamental elements of Roman civic religion—the pontiffs, augurs, and vestals—the inspiration for which he attributed to the nymph Egeria.

p. 228. andTullius Hostilius: By tradition, Tullius Hostilius (possibly 672–641 BC) was the third king of Rome. He is said to have led the struggle against the city of Alba Longa that was determined in Rome’s favor by the duel between the Horatii and the Curiatii. Alba Longa was destroyed and her citizens were incorporated into the Roman state.

p. 228. Brutus, who stepped forward with a project for such a reform…: Lucius Junius Brutus (sixth century BC), known as the "architect of Roman liberty," brought about the expulsion of Tarquinius Superbus, the last king of Rome. Upon establishing the republic, Brutus assumed the office of consul or chief executive. Noted for his stern and selfless devotion to Roman liberty, he is reputed to have ordered and witnessed the execution of his two sons for their treasonous efforts to restore the kingship. In 509 BC, the year of his death (in battle against the followers of Tarquin), Brutus shared the consulship with Publius Valerius, surnamed "Publicola" (friend of the people), a champion of popular liberties and the namesake of the authors of The Federalist.

p. 228. which, he alleged, had been prepared byServius Tullius: Servius Tullius (possibly 578–535 BC): Sixth king of Rome. Purportedly murdered by Tarquinius Superbus, the tyrannical king whose later expulsion from Rome and death mark the establishment of the republic, he is credited with the political organization of the centuries, the territorial organization of the tribes, and the initiation of the census.

p. 228. The Achaean league received its first birth fromAchaeus…: Achaeus was a figure of ancient Greek legend, eponym of the Achaeans, and reputed founder of the Achaean League. See the notes to Federalist 16.

p. 230. And if we except the observations whichNew Jerseywas led to make: In 1778, New Jersey delegates to the Continental Congress introduced a series of reservations against the Articles of Confederation, proposing, for example, that Congress should possess the exclusive power to regulate the international commerce of the United States.

p. 230. One State, we may remember, persisted for several years in refusing: The state Publius alludes to is Maryland, which withheld its ratification of the Articles of Confederation until March 1, 1781.

p. 234. they can emitbills of creditas long as they will pay for the paper…: A bill of credit is a promissory note issued by a government on its own credit. The threat of numerous state currencies, constantly fluctuating in relative value, induced the Framers of the Constitution to deprive the states of the power to issue such "paper money."

