Federalist 3

p. 38. The case of thetreaty of peace with Britain: The Treaty of Paris, signed in 1783, ended the war between the United States and Great Britain. Many of the American states continued to defy its provisions, however, refusing to restore confiscated Tory or loyalist property, to allow British creditors to collect the debts owed them by Americans, or to forbid further prosecutions of Tories.

p. 39. In the year 1685, the state ofGenoa…: Genoa is a coastal city in northwest Italy. Like its rival, Venice, Genoa gained wealth and power in the early Middle Ages as a commercial republic. Genoa promoted the Crusades, won territory on the islands of the Mediterranean, and dominated her immediate neighbors. By the end of the fourteenth-century, however, the city had lost its competition with Venice, and constant political unrest left it a prey to foreign interlopers, especially France.

p. 39. having offendedLouis XIV, endeavored to appease him: A member of the Bourbon family, Louis XIV (1638–1715) was king of France from 1643. During his minority, the government was in the hands of Cardinal Mazarin, whose unpopularity was one cause of the rebellions known as the Fronde (1648–1653). During this tumultuous period, the Thirty Years’ War came to a close(1648), and by the peace of Westphalia, in which Mazarin played an important role, France gained the German province of Alsace. On the death of Mazarin(1661), Louis engaged Colbert as minister of finances but otherwise assumed the full burden of government. His policy was to increase the prestige and prosperity of the country by concentrating all power in himself. From 1667 almost to the end of his reign, Louis involved France in wars of territorial expansion that embroiled most of the countries of Europe and finally exhausted his state. He was a munificent patron of science, commerce, the arts, and literature, but displayed a zealous intolerance toward religious nonconformers. His revocation, in 1685, of the Edict of Nantes (a declaration of religious toleration) resulted in the mass emigration of Huguenots (French Protestants). Despite numerous military losses and failures of internal administration, Louis XIV, "the Sun King," is generally acknowledged to have been the greatest monarch in French history.

p. 39. He demanded that they should send theirDoge…: Doge was the title of the chief officer of the republics of Genoa and Venice. The office originated in Venice around 690, and in Genoa in 1339, and endured in both cities until Napoleon conquered the entire region in 1797.

