Index of Ideas

administration, of finances, importance of too good government, see executive power, Presidency

agriculture, importance of, in relation to commerce, supervision of, a State affair, see "landed interest"

alliances, see confederacies, disunion, federalism

ambassadors, power to receive, power to send

amending process

America, United States of, dimensions, essential unity of, future of, isolated position of, mission in world, relations of with Europe, troubles of, under Articles of Confederation, see people, American; Union

anarchy, causes of, see disorder, instability, rebellion

anti-Federalists, see Constitution, opponents of

appointments, power to make

appointments, recess

apportionment of Representatives

appropriations, military, two-year limit on

aristocracy, see classes, elite aristocracy, natural, see elite, leadership

armies, see defense, standing armies, war powers

Articles of Confederation, condemned, "great and radical vice," as source of Constitution, troubles of United States under

Asia, trade with

assemblies, popular, improper bodies to conduct foreign affairs, improper bodies to write a constitution, natural ascendancy over second chambers, their tendency to oligarchy, their tendency to passion and instability, see democracy, legislatures

attainder, bills of, prohibited

bankruptcy, power to regulate

bicameralism, case for

bill of rights, in State constitutions, why not placed in Constitution

Bill of Rights (British)

Blackstone, William

Canada

census, decennial

centralization, fear of, derided

checks and balances, see bicameralism; government, limited; judicial review, veto

Chief Justice

citizens, American, defined

classes, social, aristocracy, "the mob," the poor, professional men, representation of, see aristocracy, faction, people

colonies, American

commander-in-chief clause

commerce, American progress in, federal power to regulate, as source of strife, State power to regulate, see economy, industry

commerce clause

common sense, appeal to, as guide to decision

compromise, in Constitution, as political value

confederacies, distinguished from federal union, historical examples, two or three of them only alternative to Union, unity of, weakness of, see alliances, disunion, federalism

Congress length of sessions, limited authority of, members ineligible for civil office, power to regulate election of own members, probable parochialism of, relations to President, see assemblies, House of Representatives, legislatures, Senate

Congress, powers of, in commerce, in defense, in diplomacy, in elections, over judiciary, miscellaneous, "necessary and proper," taxation

Congress, Revolutionary

Congress (under Articles of Confederation), provincialism of

Connecticut, constitution

consent, as basis of government, see contract, social; people

Constitution, admitted imperfections of, as alternative to chaos, amending process, as bill of rights, as bundle of compromises, extent of powers, "federal" character of, foundation in people, as higher law, ratification of, republican character of, "national" character of, "necessary and proper" clause, "supremacy" clause, see checks and balances, federalism, separation of powers

Constitution, opponents of, arguments of, character of

constitutional provisions, as "mere parchment,"

constitutionalism, see checks and balances; Constitution; government, limited

constitutions, State

contract, social, among States, see consent

contracts, laws impairing the obligation of, prohibited

Convention, Philadelphia (1787), character, difficulties of, impossibility of a second convention, legitimacy of

copyrights, power to authorize

courts, see judiciary, Supreme Court

credit, public, importance of

debts, assumption of

Declaration of Independence

defense, costliness of, as deterrent to war, provision for, in new Constitution, see standing armies, war powers

Delaware, constitution

democracy, defined as direct government by the people themselves, distinguished from republicanism, troubles of, see assemblies, popular government, republicanism, republics

democracy, direct, dangers inherent in

diplomacy, special character of

discretion, role of in government

disorder, civil, see anarchy, instability, rebellion

District of Columbia, provision in Constitution foreseeing establishment of

disunion, dangers of, arising from domestic quarrels, arising from foreign influence

economy, American, character of, future of, role of agriculture in, role of commerce in, see agriculture, commerce, industry

economy, as political good

elections, importance of, regulation of, timing of, see House of Representatives, President, Senate

electoral college, see President, election of

elite, omnipresence of, role in government of, see aristocracy, classes, leadership

emergencies, effect on constitutions, provision for

ends and means, relation between

energy, importance of for good government, of executive

equity

Europe, American isolation from, fear of entanglement in affairs of, its growing jealousy of America, see foreign influence

executive council, lack of in Constitution

executive power, expansion of in time of war, necessity of vesting veto power in, as possible threat to liberty, as proper agent for negotiating treaties, role in good government, see Presidency

experience, as guide to decision, "the oracle of truth," in public officials, as teacher

exposition, rules of

ex post facto laws, prohibited

faction, causes of, defined, effects of, how controlled, omnipresence of, as social disease, see interests, social, parties

federalism, difficulty in fixing division of powers, distinguished from national government, as equilibrium, essential principle of, as guardian of liberty, inherent weakness of, in judicial matters, nature of, tendency toward diffusion, tensions in, see confederacies, interstate relations

Federalist, The: audience of, character of, plan of

Federalists

feudalism

finances, administration of

force, as essence of law, its role in preserving civil society

foreign affairs, power to regulate

foreign influence, corrupting effects of, possibility of

foresight, limits of

France

general welfare, see public good, happiness

"general welfare" clause

Georgia, constitution

Germany

God, appeal to

Government: authority of people to alter or abolish, basis for, equilibrium in, evil consequences of instability of, limits on, mystique of, natural limits on, nature of, necessity for, its necessity for revenue, obedience to, origin of, purposes of, role of people in

Government (cont.)

structure of, as trust, see democracy, popular government, republics

government, limited, see checks and balances, Constitution, separation of powers

Great Britain, Constitution, Crown, history, judiciary, law, navy, Parliament, territories in America, trade, standing army, absence of

Greece, example of

Grotius

habeas corpus, writ of

happiness, as object of government, as social value, see public good

history, appeal to, limited uses of, see Great Britain, Greece, Rome, etc.

House of Representatives, apportionment of members, as check on Senate, dependency on people, election to, as mirror of nation, natural superiority over other branches, number of members, power of purse, qualifications for, reasons for excluding from treaty-making process, relationship to Senate, role in election of President, role in foreign affairs, role in impeachments, term, see Congress

human nature, altruism, ambition, avarice, bellicosity, bright side of, capacity for self-government, dark side of, desire for esteem, fallibility of, fickleness, habit in, irrationality, love of power, passions of, pride, selfishness, weak side of, see reason

Hume, David

impeachment, process of

Indians, trade with

individuals: importance of in history, importance of in politics, as proper subjects for legislation

industry, progress of, see economy, American

instability in government, evils of, see anarchy, disorder, rebellion

interests, social, natural diversity of, origin of, role of in guarding liberty, see classes, faction

interposition, State

interstate relations

Ireland

Italian states

Jefferson, Thomas, quoted

judicial review, of state laws

judiciary, appointment to; as guardian of Constitution; as guardian of human rights; independence of; jurisdiction of; lack of, under Articles of Confederation; power of Congress to regulate; problem of retirement age; in relation to State courts; relative weakness of; salary of judges; scope of its authority; structure of; tenure of judges; see judicial review, Supreme Court

jury trial; as "palladium of liberty,"

justice; the "great cement of society,"; as object of government

knowledge, importance of to good government

land, tax on; see agriculture

"landed interest,"

language, imprecise nature of

law; coercion as essence of; common; Constitution as; reverence for; varieties of

law of nations

leadership, importance of in popular government; see elite

legislation, fear of excesses in

legislatures: factionalism in, as guardians of liberty; natural supremacy of; special character of; their tendency to en-legislatures (cont.)

gulf other branches of government; their tendency toward rashness; see assemblies, Congress, House of Representatives, Senate

legislatures, State

liberty; boundary between it and authority; as cause of faction; nature of; protection of by government; threats to; see rights

localism, as political force

Mably, Abbé

Magna Carta

majority; in Constitution; overbearing nature of; rule of; whimsy of

man, nature of, see human nature

marque, letters of

Maryland; constitution

Massachusetts; constitution

merchants; as natural representatives of other interests and classes

military establishment, national; relation to civil authority; see defense, standing armies, war powers

militia; character of; inadequacy of; power to regulate it

minority, see faction, majority, rights

Mississippi, navigation of

"mob," the

monarchy; absolute

money; power to coin; power to coin forbidden to Sates; "the vital principle of the body politic,"

money, paper; ill effects

Montesquieu; his alleged argument for "necessity of a contracted territory for a republican government," his advice on separation of powers

quoted

morality, as element in government

mystery, as political force

national government, see Constitution, federalism, Union

national government, expense of

naturalization, power to regulate

nature, law of; its existence assumed

nature, state, of

navy; its importance to American future; provision for in Constitution

"necessary and proper" clause

Netherlands

neutrality

New Hampshire; constitution

New Jersey; constitution

New York; constitution; economy; government; governor; jury trial in; Senate; situation of; and Vermont,

nobility, prohibition of titles of

North (U.S.)

North Carolina; constitution

oligarchy; danger of; tendency to in large groups

pardoning power

parties, political; and liberty; see faction

party, spirit of; see faction

patriotism

peace and order; as social value; see stability

Pennsylvania; constitution

people, American; character of; their confidence in good government; intelligence of; their partiality for local rather than national government; as ratifying agents of Constitution; their role in election of President; their role in government; seeAmerica, United States of

people, the; capacity for self-delusion; capacity for self-government; character; their consent the basis of government; their role in government; limits to this role; and judicial review; see classes, social; consent, democracy, republics

Petition of Right

piracy, laws concerning

Plato

plural executive, case against

Plutarch

Poland

politics, science of; axioms; progress of

poll taxes

Polybius

popular government; diseases of; novelty of; role of executive in; tendency toward tyranny; see assemblies, democracy, people, republics

population; future growth

postal power

power, political; abuse of; defined; importance to government; man’s love of; necessity that it be commensurate with ends

Presidency: assistance of; case for re-eligibility to; compared and contrasted with British Monarchy; election to; fears of opposition concerning; independence; limits on; probable character of occupants; provision for salary of; qualifications for; relations to Congress; responsibility to people; term of office; unity of; see executive power

Presidency, powers of; administration of; in making appointments; diplomatic; legislative (including veto); military; pardoning; see executive power

President, election of; limited role of Congress; role of people; see electoral college

Presidential electors; likely character of

press, freedom of

"privileges and immunities" clause

professional men

property; as cause of faction; as qualification for suffrage; of United States

prosperity; see wealth, national

prudence; as guide to decision; as political virtue

public good; as guiding star of Convention; as object of government; as standard of political decision; see happiness

public opinion; importance; and liberty; role

publicity, as force in government

purse, power of

reason; its role in public affairs

rebellion; see anarchy, disorder, instability

re-eligibility to Presidency, case for

religion; and liberty; situation of in America

removal power

representation; importance of; nature of; quality of

republicanism; characteristics of; guarantee of in Constitution

republics; defined; diseases and remedy; natural frugality; penchant for war; susceptibility to foreign corruption; tendency to disorder; viability for extended territory; see democracy, popular government

requisitions on States

responsibility, political

revenue; more easily raised by Union; necessity; see taxation

Revolution, American; costliness of; hand of God in; militia in; its services to mankind

revolution, right of

Rhode Island; constitution

rights; dangers to; of minority; natural; see bill of rights, liberty

Rome; dictatorship in; rotation in office

Scotland

security, as object of government

self-preservation, right of

Senate; character of; election to; necessity for; qualifications for, relation to House of Representatives, its role in appointments; its role in foreign affairs, its role in impeachments; State representation in; term; see Congress

separation of powers

separation of powers (cont.); analyzed; bulwark of liberty; in Constitution, Montesquieu’s observations on; in State constitutions; see checks and balances

Shays’ Rebellion

slave trade, barbarism of

slaves; apology for counting them in scheme of representation

smuggling

South (U.S.)

South Carolina, constitution

sovereignty; nature of; of States

Spain

stability, political; importance of to liberty; as social value; see peace and orderstanding armies, fear of; origin of tradition

State governments, ability to resist national government, concurrent authority with national government; courts, imperfect nature of even the best, inadequacy for common defense, natural tendency to encroach on national government; popular preference for; powers of; prohibitions on; see constitutions, State

State legislatures; as improper bodies to control national elections; power of to check national government; power of to elect Senate

State officers; their oath to support Constitution

States: ability to resist national government, dissension among; not proper subjects for legislation; political equality of; probable reaction to encroachments of national government, probable superiority to national government; prohibitions on; relations among; republicanism of, guaranteed; their role in elections; as source of legitimacy of Constitution, sovereignty of see constitutions, State

States, large

States, new

power to admit

States, small

suffrage

"supremacy" clause

Supreme Court, appellate jurisdiction of, impropriety in acting as court of impeachment, impropriety in sharing in power of veto; necessity for; original jurisdiction of; in relation to lower courts; in relation to State courts; see judiciary

Switzerland

taxation, authority of national government in; authority of States in; as essential power of government, prohibitions on States; shared jurisdictionin; see money, revenue

tenure, official, and stability

territory, extended as defensive of liberty

territory, power to regulate

tolerance, as social value

treason, power to define and punish

treaties; character of, as law of land, as law of nations, power to make; power to make, prohibited to States

trust, concept of

Turkey

tyranny; conditions leading to, steps to, "very definition of,"

unconstitutionality, concept of

Union of States; advantages of; conditions favoring; as breeder of political talent; dangers to, growing affection for; purposes, as stimulus to commerce

Vermont

veto power

Vice-Presidency

violence, domestic, as social evil; see anarchy, disorder, instability, rebellion

Virginia, constitution

war; causes of, costliness of, nature of; power to declare; prevention of; as a "science,"; see defense, standing armies

war powers; in Constitution, importance of not restricting; two-year limit on military appropriations; unlimited nature of; see defense, militia

weakness in government, as invitation to tyranny; as object of scorn; as social ill

wealth, national; organs of; see prosperity West, future of, West Indies





* The same idea, tracing the arguments to their consequences, is held out in several of the late publications against the new Constitution.





* The League of Cambray, comprehending the Emperor, the King of France, the King of Aragon, and most of the Italian princes and states.





† The Duke of Marlborough.





*Vide Principes des Négociations par l’Abbé de Mably.





* Divide and command.





* This objection will be fully examined in its proper place, and it will be shown that the only rational precaution which could have been taken on this subject has been taken; and a much better one than is to be found in any constitution that has been heretofore framed in America, most of which contain no guard at all on this subject.





*Spirit of Laws, Vol. I., Book IX., Chap. I.





* "Recherches philosophiques sur les Américains."





* "I mean for the Union."





* This was but another name more specious for the independence of the members on the federal head.





*Pfeffel, "Nouvel Abrég. Chronol. de l’Hist., etc., d’Allemagne," says the pretext was to indemnify himself for the expense of the expedition.





* Aspasia, vide Plutarch’s Life of Pericles.





* This, as nearly as I can recollect, was the sense of his speech in introducing the last bill.





†Encyclopedia article "Empire."





* New Hampshire, Rhode Island, New Jersey, Delaware, Georgia, South Carolina, and Maryland are a majority of the whole number of the States, but they do not contain one third of the people.





* Add New York and Connecticut to the foregoing seven, and they will be less than a majority.





* This statement of the matter is taken from the printed collections of State constitutions. Pennsylvania and North Carolina are the two which contain the interdiction in these words: "As standing armies in time of peace are dangerous to liberty, THEY OUGHT NOT to be kept up." This is, in truth, rather a CAUTION than a PROHIBITION. New Hampshire, Massachusetts, Delaware, and Maryland have, in each of their bills of rights, a clause to this effect: "Standing armies are dangerous to liberty, and ought not to be raised or kept up WITHOUT THE CONSENT OF THE LEGISLATURE"; which is a formal admission of authority of the legislature. New York has no bill of her rights, and her constitution says not a word about the matter. No bills of rights appear annexed to the constitutions of the other States, except the foregoing, and their constitutions are equally silent. I am told, however, that one or two States have bills of rights which do not appear in this collection; but that those also recognize the right of the legislative authority in this respect.





* The sophistry which has been employed to show that this will tend to the destruction of the State governments will, in its proper place, be fully detected.





* Its full efficacy will be examined hereafter.





* The New England States.





* Connecticut and Rhode Island.





* Declaration of Independence.





†Ibid.





* Burgh’s Political Disquisitions.





* 1st clause, 4th section, of the 1st article.





* Particularly in the Southern States and in this State.





* In that of New Jersey, also, the final judiciary authority is in a branch of the legislature. In New Hampshire, Massachusetts, Pennsylvania, and South Carolina, one branch of the legislature is the court for the trial of impeachments.





* See CATO, No. V.





† Article 1, Section 3, Clause 1.





*Vide Federal Farmer.





* A writer in a Pennsylvania paper, under the signature of T AMONY, has asserted that the king of Great Britain owes his prerogative as commander-in-chief to an annual mutiny bill. The truth is, on the contrary, that his prerogative in this respect is immemorial, and was only disputed "contrary to all reason and precedent," as Blackstone, vol. I, page 262, expresses it, by the Long Parliament of Charles I; but by the statute the 13th of Charles II, chap. 6, it was declared to be in the king alone, for that the sole supreme government and command of the militia within his Majesty’s realms and dominions, and of all forces by sea and land, and of all forts and places of strength, EVER WAS AND IS the undoubted right of his Majesty and his royal predecessors, kings and queens of England, and that both or either house of Parliament cannot nor ought to pretend to the same.





*VideBlackstone’sCommentaries, Vol. I., p. 257.





* Candor, however, demands an acknowledgment that I do not think the claim of the governor to a right of nomination well founded. Yet it is always justifiable to reason from the practice of a government till its propriety has been constitutionally questioned. And independent of this claim, when we take into view the other considerations and pursue them through all their consequences, we shall be inclined to draw much the same conclusion.





‡Ibid. Phidias was supposed to have stolen some public gold, with the connivance of Pericles, for the embellishment of the statue of Minerva.





* New York has no council except for the single purpose of appointing to offices; New Jersey has a council whom the governor may consult. But I think, from the terms of the Constitution, their resolutions do not bind him.





* De Lolme.





* Ten





* This was the case with respect to Mr. Fox’s India bill, which was carried in the House of Commons and rejected in the House of Lords, to the entire satisfaction, as it is said, of the people.





*Mr. Abraham Yates, a warm opponent of the plan of the convention, is of this number.





* The celebrated Montesquieu, speaking of them, says: "Of the three powers above mentioned, the JUDICIARY is next to nothing."—Spirit of Laws, Vol. I, page 186.





*Idem, page 181.





*Vide Protest of the Minority of the Convention of Pennsylvania, Martin’s speech, etc.





*VideConstitution of Massachusetts, Chapter 2, Section 1, Article 13.





* Article 3, Section 1.





§Ibid.





* This power has been absurdly represented as intended to abolish all the county courts in the several States which are commonly called inferior courts. But the expressions of the Constitution are to constitute "tribunals INFERIOR TO THE SUPREME COURT"; and the evident design of the provision is to enable the institution of local courts, subordinate to the Supreme, either in States or larger districts. It is ridiculous to imagine that county courts were in contemplation.





* This word is composed of JUS and DICTO, juris, dictio, or a speaking or pronouncing of the law.





* I hold that the States will have concurrent jurisdiction with the subordinate federal judicatories in many cases of federal cognizance as will be explained in my next paper.





* No. 32.





* Section 8, Article 1.





* It has been erroneously insinuated, with regard to the court of chancery, that this court generally tries disputed facts by a jury. The truth is that references to a jury in that court rarely happen, and are in no case necessary but where the validity of a devise of land comes into question.





* It is true that the principles by which that relief is governed are now reduced to a regular system; but it is not the less true that they are in the main applicable to SPECIAL circumstances, which form exceptions to general rules.





*Vide No. 81 in which the supposition of its being abolished by the appellate jurisdiction in matters of fact being vested in the Supreme Court is examined and refuted.





*Vide Blackstone’s Commentaries, Vol. 1, Page 136.





† Idem, Vol. 4, Page 438.





|| Worn by the popes.





* To show that there is a power in the Constitution by which the liberty of the press may be affected, recourse has been had to the power of taxation. It is said that duties may be laid upon the publications so high as to amount to a prohibition. I know not by what logic it could be maintained that the declarations in the State constitutions, in favor of the freedom of the press, would be a constitutional impediment to the imposition of duties upon publications by the State legislatures. It cannot certainly be pretended that any degree of duties, however low, would be an abridgment of the liberty of the press. We know that newspapers are taxed in Great Britain, and yet it is notorious that the press nowhere enjoys greater liberty than in that country. And if duties of any kind may be laid without a violation of that liberty, it is evident that the extent must depend on legislative discretion, regulated by public opinion; so that, after all, general declarations respecting the liberty of the press will give it no greater security than it will have without them. The same invasions of it may be effected under the State constitutions which contain those declarations through the means of taxation, as under the proposed Constitution, which has nothing of the kind. It would be quite as significant to declare that government ought to be free, that taxes ought not to be excessive, etc., as that the liberty of the press ought not to be restrained.





*VideRutherforth’s Institutes, Vol. 2, book II, Chapter X, Sections XIV and XV. Vide also Grotius, Book II, Chapter IX, Sections VIII and IX.





* Entitled "An Address to the People of the State of New York."





* It may rather be said TEN, for though two thirds may set on foot the measure, three fourths must ratify.





* Hume’s Essays, Vol. I, page 128: "The Rise of Arts and Sciences."





* Madame de Maintenon.





† Duchess of Marlborough.





‡ Madame de Pompadour.





