The Federalist Papers (Clinton Rossiter (ed.) Charles R. Kessler)


MESSAGE TO MANKIND

The authors and supporters of the Constitution of 1787 foresaw that a clear-cut vote against it in the state ratifying conventions would destroy the United States’ most important experiment in popular government. A particular point of concern was the growing state of New York, whose governor, George Clinton, was a formidable opponent of the proposed charter.

Alexander Hamilton, in an energetic effort to win over his home state, began a series of essays explaining and defending the Constitution. These were published in New York City newspapers under the pseudonym Publius. Hamilton was aided by contributions from two advocates of a new and energetic national government, James Madison and John Jay. The efforts of these three men resulted in The Federalist Papers—an authoritative analysis of the young nation’s Constitution and an enduring classic of political philosophy.





THE FEDERALIST PAPERS

Alexander Hamilton James Madison John Jay

EDITED BY CLINTON ROSSITER

WITH AN INTRODUCTION AND NOTES

BY CHARLES R. KESLER



A SIGNET CLASSIC





SIGNET CLASSIC

Published by New American Library, a division of

Penguin Putnam Inc., 375 Hudson Street,

New York, New York 10014, U.S.A.

Penguin Books Ltd, 80 Strand,

London WC2R 0RL, England

Penguin Books Australia Ltd, 250 Camberwell Road,

Camberwell, Victoria 3124, Australia

Penguin Books Canada Ltd, 10 Alcorn Avenue,

Toronto, Ontario, Canada M4V 3B2

Penguin Books (N.Z.) Ltd, Cnr Rosedale and Airborne Roads, Albany, Auckland 1310, New Zealand

Penguin Books Ltd, Registered Offices:

Harmondsworth, Middlesex, England

Published by Signet Classic, an imprint of New American Library, a division of Penguin Putnam Inc. Previously published in a Mentor edition.

Copyright Penguin Putnam Inc., 1961

Introduction and notes copyright © Charles R. Kesler, 1999 All rights reserved

ISBN: 978-1-1012-1290-5

REGISTERED TRADEMARK—MARCA REGISTRADA

The Library of Congress has catalogued the Mentor edition of this title as follows: 99-13668.

Without limiting the rights under copyright reserved above, no part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in or introduced into a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form, or by any means (electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise), without the prior written permission of both the copyright owner and the above publisher of this book.

The scanning, uploading and distribution of this book via the Internet or via any other means without the permission of the publisher is illegal and punishable by law. Please purchase only authorized electronic editions, and do not participate in or encourage electronic piracy of copyrighted materials. Your support of the author’s rights is appreciated.







