Federalist 19

p. 124. The Franks…having conqueredthe Gauls…: The Franks were members of a confederation of Germanic tribes originating in the region of the Rhine that formed a kingdom in the territory of Gaul after the fall of the Roman Empire. The Gauls were ancient Celtic inhabitants of the region in Europe roughly comprising modern France but including also parts of northern Italy (Cisalpine Gaul). From 58 to 51 BC, Julius Caesar conquered Gaul for Rome and recorded his exploits in the Commentaries on the Gallic War. With the collapse of the Western Empire in AD 476, Gaul fell to the Franks.

p. 124. Charlemagne, its warlike monarch, carried his victorious arms in every direction…: Charlemagne (742–814) was king of the Franks from 768, and from 800 until his death, emperor of the West. He succeeded to a unified Frankish throne upon the death of his brother, but proceeded to expand the kingdom by conquering Saxony and Lombardy. He united the West German tribes under his rule. On Christmas Day, 800, he was crowned by Pope Leo III as Emperor of the Romans. In addition to establishing what became known as the Holy Roman Empire, he was a great patron of science and the arts.

p. 125 theimperial chamberand theaulic council…: The Imperial Chamber (Reichskammergericht) was established in 1495, during the reign of Maximilian I, as the supreme judicial court of the Holy Roman Empire. The Aulic Council (Reichshofrat) was founded in 1498 to assist the emperor in executive matters. Both institutions were created in an effort, led by the imperial diet, to reform the government of the empire and to replace the idiosyncratic bonds of feudal obligation with the uniform fabric of civil law. The Chamber was to be the court of the Empire not of the emperor, and its members (ultimately, eighteen), nominated by the estates of the Empire, were to be learned in the Roman law. In practice, the Chamber suffered from a lack of funds and from competition with the far more efficient Aulic Council, which body, having lost its executive powers after the sixteenth century, expanded the scope of its judicial activities at the expense of the Chamber. In contrast to the Chamber, the Council was closely tied to the emperor. He nominated and paid its twenty members, and their terms ended with his life. Both Chamber and Council vanished with the dissolution of the Empire in 1806.

p. 126. very near being made prisoner bythe elector of Saxony: The electors of Saxony were rulers of a German-speaking territory (including the cities of Dresden and Leipzig) established in the thirteenth century after the division of the duchy of Saxony. From the thirteenth to the nineteenth centuries, the elector of Saxony was one of seven ecclesiastical and secular German princes who chose the Holy Roman Emperor. By the end of the Thirty Years’ War (1648), Saxony had emerged as one of the strongest duchies in Germany, and by 1697, Elector Augustus II had joined the kingdom of Poland to his possessions. Saxony attained an intellectual and cultural zenith between the War of the Polish Succession (1733–1738) and the Seven Years’ War (1756–1763), but thereafter began to decline. In 1806, Napoleon conquered the duchy and established a kingdom in its place.

p. 126. a war of thirty years, in which the emperor…was on one side, and Sweden…on the opposite side: The Thirty Years’ War was an intermittent conflict in the period from 1618 to 1648 that permanently weakened the Holy Roman Empire and established France as the major power in seventeenth-century European politics. The war began in Bohemia, whose Protestant inhabitants resisted religious persecution by imperial authorities. During much of the war Sweden and France opposed Spain and the Holy Roman Empire. Although religious conflict between Catholics and Protestants triggered the war, the treaty of Westphalia that put an end to hostilities in 1648 reflected the participants’ recognition of the realities of European political power in the seventeenth century. Under the terms of the treaty, each prince determined the religion of his subjects, the Holy Roman Empire was forced to recognize the sovereignty of numerous small states within its domain, and the Netherlands and Switzerland gained official recognition of their independence from Hapsburg rule.

p. 127. We may form some judgment…froma sample given by Thuanus: Jacques Auguste de Thou (1553–1617), also known as Thuanus, was a French historian and statesman. He was councillor of state under Henry III, master of the Royal Library, and president a` mortier in the Parliament of Paris under Henry IV. He played an important role in framing the Edict of Nantes (a declaration of religious toleration in 1598). His best-known work, the History of His Own Time (published posthumously in 1620), was favorably received by the public at large but vehemently attacked by the Catholic Church. The "sample" cited in The Federalist is a description of an incident typical of the political turmoil in seventeenth-century Germany. L’Abb Millot, de St. Croix was a leader of the Catholic minority in the free city of Donauwörth, in the Swabian region of southwestern Germany. His mistreatment at the hands of the city’s Protestant majority caused the emperor to revoke the municipal privileges and provided the pretext for the Duke of Bavaria’s conquest and annexation of the city in 1608.

p. 127n. Pfeffel…says the pretext was to indemnify himself…: Christian Friedrich Pfeffel (1726–1807) was a German historian and jurist. His principal work is the Chronological Epitome of the History of the Public Law of Germany, published in French in 1754.

p. 128. The connection amongthe Swiss cantonsscarcely amounts to a confederacy…: The cantons are local governing units of Switzerland. In 1291, Uri, Schwyz, and Unterwalden, the three forest cantons, formed a confederation for mutual defense against the ruling Austrian Hapsburgs. During the following two centuries, the remaining cantons joined the confederation, which was recognized, under the Peace of Westphalia of 1648, as an independent state.

p. 129. a clause in their treaty of 1683 withVictor Amadeusof Savoy…: Victor Amadeus II (1666–1732) was Duke of Savoy from 1675. Straddling the Alps between what is now France and Italy, the former state of Savoy abutted and had once ruled parts of Switzerland.

p. 129. ofBerne, as the head of the Protestant association…: During the sixteenth century, Berne was the leading member of the Protestant faction of the Swiss Confederation. Encouraged by Ulrich Zwingli (Protestant leader of Zurich), Berne joined Zurich and several other cantons in a union (1528) designed to secure religious freedom. Although the Protestant league suffered military defeat in 1531, it managed to win recognition for the principle of "parity"; that is, religious minorities were henceforth free to follow their faith in all regions of Switzerland.

p. 129. and ofLuzerne, as the head of the Catholic association…: Luzerne (Lucerne) was the leading member of the Golden or Borromean League of Swiss cantons, formed in 1586 to combat the progress of the Reformation in Switzerland.

