Federalist 34

p. 202. an opposite interest prevailed: in one, thepatrician; in the other, theplebeian: Patricians were a class of hereditary Roman aristocrats, dating back probably to the time of the Roman kings. In the early Roman republic, the patricians dominated the most important priestly offices and gradually came to monopolize the political (i.e., magisterial) offices, though the Senate remained open to non-patricians. Between the fifth and third centuries BC, however, these monopolies were challenged and broken in a series of conflicts with the plebeians or plebs. The plebs comprised the mass of Roman citizens, mostly poor. Driven by debt and a shortage, or maldistribution, of land and food, the plebs withdrew from Rome in 494 BC and established on a nearby hill a rival polity with its own assembly (concilium plebis), magistrates (especially the plebeian tribunes), laws (plebiscites), and religious practices. The crisis ended with the Roman republic’s recognition of this plebeian organization, and over the next two centuries (and two more secession crises), the plebeian regime was fully integrated into Roman political life. The assembly of the plebs, for example, became the inspiration and basis of the comitia tributa (see the next note), and by the mid-fourth century the consulship and the major priestly offices had been divided between the two orders. Debt relief and the distribution of conquered lands to the plebs helped to seal the new bargain.

p. 202. I allude to theCOMITIA CENTURIATAandCOMITIA TRIBUTA: A "comitia" (actually a plural noun) was a popular assembly in ancient Rome. There were two main types (a third, the comitia curiata, was concerned mostly with religious matters). The comitia centuriata, in which power was heavily slanted in favor of the patrician families and older and wealthier citizens, enacted laws, elected higher magistrates, declared war and peace, and served as the final court of appeal in capital cases involving Roman citizens. The comitia tributa was a much less oligarchic body, organized by territorial tribe, which enacted plebiscites, elected lower magistrates (including the plebeian tribunes), and held trials for non-capital offenses. Although they retained a formal existence under the Empire, these assemblies had already ceased to function as an independent popular voice by the late first century BC.

