Federalist 18

p. 118. the Grecian republics, associated underthe Amphictyonic council: In general, the Greek term amphictyony—literally "dwellers around"—designated the leagues organized for the maintenance and defense of sanctuaries and their associated cults. But the term came to be identified particularly with the league pertaining to the oracle at Delphi, the most important and the richest of the Greek sanctuaries. The Amphictyonic council or confederacy eventually included most of the cities of Greece. Each city sent two or more representatives who would cast two votes on contested issues of league policy. In principle, the confederacy was empowered to propose measures deemed useful for Greece, to judge differences between member cities, and to make peace and war, but the stronger cities often bullied the weaker to cast votes in their favor. Moreover, the confederacy neither restrained its members from warring amongst themselves nor prevented non-Greeks—such as Philip II of Macedon—from attaining membership.

p. 118. guardians of…the immense riches belonging to thetemple of Delphos…: The home of the Delphic oracle, the temple of Delphos lay within the territory of Phocis at the foot of Mt. Parnassus. This was the most important oracle in the Greek world. Cities and individuals consulted the priestess of Apollo for divine guidance on colonization, removing pollution (i.e. seeking release from religious impurity), and cultic observances. The inquirer paid a fee to consult the oracle, which returned ambiguous pronouncements requiring interpretation. As the Delphic oracle became preeminent in Greek religious affairs it naturally acquired a political significance, in several instances drawing the members of its custodial council, the Delphic Amphictyony (or Amphictyonic League), into war. The battle of Chaeronea (338 BC), in which Philip II—leading the forces of the Amphictyonic League against Athens and Thebes—succeeded in bringing Greece under Macedonian control, was the culmination of the Fourth Sacred War.

p. 119. as we learn fromDemosthenes…: Demosthenes (384–322 BC) was an Athenian orator. Entering politics in 354 BC, he displayed a talent for rhetoric that established his reputation as one of the greatest public speakers of the ancient world. In 351 BC, he delivered the first of a series of speeches (the "Philippics") in which he attempted to persuade Athenians to resist the growing power of Philip II of Macedon. As a result of these speeches, Athens made war on Macedon (340 BC), but suffered utter defeat at the battle of Chaeronea (338 BC). In the aftermath of the loss to Philip and the subsequent domination by Alexander, Demosthenes vindicated his conduct in a masterpiece of apologetic oratory, "On the Crown." Living in exile after a prosecution for embezzlement, he took his own life in order to escape the agents of one of Alexander’s successors, Antipater.

p. 119. The Lacedaemoniansnext governed it twenty-nine years…: The Lacedaemonians were inhabitants of a region of ancient Greece called Lacedaemon, located in the southeastern Peloponnesus, including the territories of Laconia and Messinia. The chief city of Lacedaemon was Sparta.

p. 119. after thebattle of Leuctra, the Thebans had their turn of domination: In 371 BC, the Thebans, under the leadership of Epaminondas, decisively defeated the Spartans at Leuctra and thereby gained a brief ascendancy over the city-states of Greece.

p. 119. After the conclusion of the war withXerxes…: Xerxes (c. 519–465 BC) was king of Persia (from 486 BC), an ancient empire centered in what is today Iran but at times extending as far east as the Indus river valley and as far west as Mesopotamia (modern Iraq) and Asia Minor (modern Turkey). Like his father, Darius I, Xerxes attempted unsuccessfully to suppress the Greek city-states and join them to the Persian empire. In pursuit of this goal, he raised an enormous army, built a pontoon bridge across the Hellespont, and marched into Greece in 480 BC. Delayed by the Spartans at the mountain pass of Thermopylae, the Persians finally overran the position and continued their march to Athens. By this time, Themistocles had persuaded the Athenians to stake their fortunes on the navy and to flee their city for the nearby island of Salamis. The Persian army occupied the abandoned city, but at the naval battle of Salamis (480 BC) the Persian fleet suffered a decisive defeat. Xerxes crossed back into Asia leaving only a remnant of his army under Mardonius that was destroyed at Platea the following year (479). In 465, Xerxes was assassinated by one of his officers.

p. 119. Had the Greeks, saysthe Abbé Millot, been as wise as they were courageous…: Claude Francois Xavier, L’Abbé de Millot, (1726–1785), was a French historian. He was the author of Elements of Universal History and Political and Military Notes toward the History of Louis XIV (1777).

p. 120. The Phocianshaving plowed up some consecrated ground…: The Phocians were inhabitants of a region of central Greece in the vicinity of Mt. Parnassus. By the sixth century BC, the communities of Phocis had developed a strong federated government with a uniform coinage and a federal army. The nearby presence of the important Oracle at Delphi made Phocis the focus of the first three Sacred Wars.

p. 120. TheThebans…undertook to maintain the authority of the Amphictyons…: The Thebans were inhabitants of Thebes, a city of ancient Greece in the territory of Boeotia. Thebes had a longstanding rivalry with Athens, its neighbor to the southeast. Although Thebes allied itself with Sparta during the Peloponnesian war, it came to resent Spartan domination, and at the battle of Leuctra (371 BC) won a great victory against the Spartans. Turning then, with Athens, to face the threat from Philip II of Macedon, Thebes suffered defeat at Chaeronea (338 BC), and utter destruction at the hands of Alexander two years later.

p. 120. The latter, being the weaker party, invited the assistance ofPhilip of Macedon…: Philip II (382–336 BC) ruled the ancient kingdom of Macedon (from 359), which was located at the top of the Balkan Peninsula of southern Europe. From the beginning of his reign, Philip took advantage of Greek disunity to enlarge Macedonian territory. Eventually, Philip’s policies (and Demosthenes’s speeches against Philip) energized Athens to confront Macedonian imperialism directly. Despite initial success, however, Athens and her allies suffered decisive defeat at Chaeronea in 338 BC (the culmination of the Fourth Sacred War), and Philip became the de facto ruler of Greece. Two years later, while Philip was planning a joint Greek-Macedonian invasion of Persia, a member of his bodyguard assassinated him. Philip’s son, Alexander, continued the project of conquest his father had begun.

p. 120. she would never have worn the chains ofMacedon…: Macedon was an ancient kingdom, located in the Balkan Peninsula of southern Europe, that rose briefly to the status of a world power under the leadership of the fourth century BC conqueror, Alexander the Great. Today, the region is divided among Greece, Bulgaria, and the Republic of Macedonia.

p. 121. When Lacedaemon was brought into the league byPhilopoemen…: Philopoemen (c. 253–182 BC) was a statesman and general of the Achaean League. He defeated the Spartans at Mantinea (207 BC) and eventually brought Sparta into the league (192). His demilitarization of Sparta was extremely unpopular and led to friction with Rome, which, although nominally an ally, attempted repeatedly to influence the internal policies of the league. While attempting to put down a revolt by Messene, Philopoemen was captured and killed.

p. 121. it was attended with an abolition of the institutions and laws ofLycurgus…: By tradition, Lycurgus was the first lawgiver of Sparta. Although ancient accounts differ, he is generally thought to have ruled in the seventh century BC and to have established Sparta’s eunomia (good order), a series of strict regulations designed to foster military prowess, social stability, and economic austerity.

p. 121. after the renovation of the league byAratus…: Aratus (271–213 BC) was a statesman of Sicyon, a city of ancient Greece located in the Peloponnese to the west of Corinth. Aratus expelled the tyrant Nicocles and joined his city to the Archaean Confederacy. Under his influence, the Confederacy followed a policy of opposition to Macedon until the growth of Spartan power and defeat at the hands of Cleomenes III forced it to request Macedonian assistance. Later, Aratus resisted Philip V’s anti-Roman policy. Philip was rumored to have arranged Aratus’s death.

p. 122. kings of Egypt and Syria, who, as successors ofAlexander…: Alexander III, "the Great" (356–323 BC), was one of the greatest military leaders in history. Upon succeeding his father, Philip II, as king of Macedon and Hegemon of the League of Corinth, Alexander quelled any doubts as to his own abilities by defeating and utterly destroying the city of Thebes. From the firm foundation of a pacified Greece, he launched the campaign of world conquest that his father had envisioned before his assassination. From 334 BC, when he departed Greece with an army of about 50,000 men, until his death in 323 BC, he conquered the entire Persian empire and many of the surrounding regions, reaching as far as Egypt in the west and northern India in the east. His death—attributed variously to fever or poison—put an end to plans of further conquest, and resulted in the partition of the conquered regions among his leading generals.

p. 122. This policy was defeated byCleomenes…: Cleomenes III was king of Sparta from 235 until 222 BC. Social reformer and aggressive promoter of Spartan power, he expanded Spartan territory in Arcadia at the expense of the Aetolian and Achaean Confederacies. His success provoked Aratus (of the Achaean Confederacy) into negotiating for military aid from Antigonus III of Macedon. The latter routed Cleomenes’s army in 222 and thus set in motion the chain of events that would result in the entry of Roman forces as a counterweight to Macedonian power.

p. 123. though weakened by internal dissensions and by the revolt ofMessene…: Messene was a city in the territory of Messenia in the southwestern portion of the Peloponnesus bordering Laconia. Spartans from Laconia conquered Messenia by 620 BC and reduced the inhabitants to the status of helots, or publicly owned slaves. The ever-present threat—and occasional outbreak—of revolt on the part of these Messenian helots fostered the development of the Spartan military state. In 369 BC, with the help of Epaminondas of Thebes, Messenia won independence from Sparta. To secure the Messenian victory against a Spartan resurgence, Epaminondas founded the stronghold city of Messene. At a later date (182 BC), Messene was incorporated by the anti-Macedonian Achaean Confederacy, which in turn fell victim to Rome.

p. 123. one of its members, being joined by theAetolians…: The Aetolians were inhabitants of a rugged region in west-central Greece who remained politically and economically backward into the fifth century BC. After 370 BC, the various towns in Aetolia were unified under the Aetolian Confederacy. The League expanded in the third century by annexing Delphi and western Phocis, among other neighboring regions. Defeat at the hands of the Romans in 189 BC resulted in a reduction to original dimensions and a gradual loss of population.

p. 123. Philipwas conquered; Macedon subdued: Philip V (238–179 BC) was king of Macedonia from 221 BC. As commander of the army of the Achaean League, he won victories against the Aetolians and the Spartans (218–217 BC). After the Roman disaster at Cannae (a Carthaginian victory during the Second Punic War), he made an opportunistic alliance with Hannibal (215 BC), but the Romans eventually defeated Carthage and sought in the First and Second Macedonian Wars (211–205; 200–197 BC), to chastise Philip. Although Philip had the advantage at the end of the first war, by the end of the second, at the battle of Cynoscephalae (197 BC) he was defeated and forced to submit to harsh Roman terms, including the payment of tribute.

p. 123. Callicratesand other popular leaders…: Callicrates (d. 149 BC) was an Achaean politician. As envoy to Rome (180–179 BC), he persuaded the Senate to support Roman sympathizers within the Greek states. As strategos, or chief magistrate of the Achaean League, he followed a pro-Roman policy. He is known for his treachery, which included providing Rome with a list of 1000 Achaeans (including the historian Polybius) to be interned so as to prevent their resistance to Roman hegemony.

