5 LONG AGO AND FAR AWAY: Fictional Setting


5: Long Ago and Far Away



FICTIONAL SETTING



Atmosphere: Place, Time, and Mood

Harmony and Conflict Between Character and Place

Symbolic Place

Some Aspects of Narrative Time

Summary and Scene

White Space

Flashback

Slow Motion

Our relation to place, time, and weather, like our relation to clothes and other objects, is charged with emotion more or less subtle, more or less profound. It is filled with judgment mellow or harsh. And it alters according to what happens to us. In some rooms you are always trapped; you enter them with grim purpose and escape them as soon as you can. Others invite you to settle in, to nestle or carouse. Some landscapes lift your spirits; others depress you. Cold weather gives you energy and bounce, or else it clogs your head and makes you huddle, struggling. You describe yourself as a night person or a morning person. The house you loved as a child now makes you, precisely because you were once happy there, think of loss and death.

All such emotion can be used, heightened, or invented to dramatic effect in fiction. Just as significant detail calls up a sense impression and also an abstraction, so the setting of a story imparts both information and emotion. Likewise, just as the rhythm of your prose must work with and not against your intention, so your use of narrative place and time must work with and not against your ultimate meaning. Like dialogue, setting must do more than one thing at a time, from revealing emotion to illuminating character to suggesting the story’s symbolic underpinnings.

Character itself is a product of place and culture. We need to know in what atmosphere a character operates in order to understand the significance of the action. Scarlett O’Hara of Margaret Mitchell’s Gone with the Wind operates as she does because she grew up in heat, damp, and luxury, surrounded by slaves whose loyalty she counts on without examining their lives. Sethe of Toni Morrison’s Beloved behaves as she does because she grew up enslaved in the same heat and damp, in perpetual terror of the master who comes for her and her babies after she reaches freedom. Fiction writer Michael Martone says that a truly effective evocation of fictional setting might resemble those New Deal post office murals from the 1930s and early ’40s. Any one of the figures in the murals has his or her own story while at the same time being embedded in the larger story of the whole painting. As we observe the figures, we may see the social interactions between them but at the same time are aware of the layers of history and social forces evidenced in their buildings, their inventions, appliances, transportation, agriculture, and efforts to tame and control nature.

“These murals attempt,” says Martone, “by the design of hundreds of details, to convey the simultaneous presence of the historic and social life of the greater community with the personal specific struggle of a protagonist. Purely as a practical matter, placing stories in such fertile media will make it easier for things to happen, for characters to do things.”



ATMOSPHERE: TIME, PLACE, AND MOOD

Your fiction must have an atmosphere because without it your characters will be unable to breathe.

Part of the atmosphere of a story is its setting, including the locale, period, weather, and time of day. Part of the atmosphere is its tone, an attitude taken by the narrative voice that can be described in terms of a mood, emotion, or quality—sinister, satirical, formal, solemn, wry. The two facets of atmosphere, setting and tone, are often inextricably mixed in the ultimate effect: a sinister atmosphere might be achieved partly by syntax, rhythm, and word choice, partly by night, mist, and a desolate landscape. You can orient your reader in place and time with straight information, (On the southern bank of the Bayou Teche in the summer of ’69 . . .), and that may be the best beginning for your purposes, but as with the revelation of character you may more effectively reveal setting through concrete detail (The bugs hung over the black water in clusters of a steady hum . . .). Here the information is indirect and we may have to wait for some of it, but the experience is direct, dropping us immediately into the scene and revealing an attitude that implies a character’s relation to the scene.

My books all begin the same way . . . usually just a strong sense of time and place. A real sense of atmosphere—that’s always my entry point.



—Jennifer Egan



The very language in which setting is expressed will carry significant clues to the ultimate meaning of a piece. Here, in the novel All the Pretty Horses by Cormac McCarthy, a sonorous narrative voice suggests the wisdom of the ages:


They said that a man leaves much when he leaves his own country. They said that it was no accident of circumstance that a man be born in a certain country and not some other and they said that the weathers and seasons that form a land form also the inner fortunes of men in their generations.





By contrast, the heroine of my novel Cutting Stone, suffering over the fact that she must leave her own country, makes the same observation as a personal, more modest discovery:


She thought: Over time a landscape takes its shape, and then over time it takes its shape in you. I’m the shape of this place.





In practice, because words carry accumulated connotations, it’s almost inevitable that the mood will also be suggested by place and time. The standard opening of a fairy tale connotes a remote and magical setting and sets up an expectation of what might happen here. Any individual details will alter and add to that expectation. What, for example, would you expect from the following beginnings of fairy tales?


Once upon a time in a kingdom by the sea . . .





Once upon a time in a humble cottage beside a cabbage patch . . .





Once upon a time in the deepest, darkest forest . . .





The connotations of “kingdom” and “sea,” “humble cottage” and “cabbage patch,” or “deepest, darkest forest” instantly let us know what kind of story we’re in for. You can take advantage of, and heighten, such atmosphere by choosing words whose connotations make vivid the evocation of time and place. Here are three contemporary authors at work on settings in North Korea, Africa, and London. What words and phrases evoke what expectations of what might happen here? Which of these places is the most dangerous?


And then in the year Juche 85, the floods came. Three weeks of rain, yet the loudspeakers said nothing of terraces collapsing, earth dams giving, villages cascading into one another. The Army was busy trying to save the Sungli 58 factory from the rising water, so the Long Tomorrows boys were given ropes and long-handled gaffs to try to snare people from the Chongjin River before they were washed into the harbor.





—Adam Johnson, The Orphan Master’s Son



They breezed through the checkpoints and soon were on the open road, circling the pale city from above. Dolly noticed vendors by the road. Often they were children, who held up handfuls of fruit or cardboard signs as the jeeps approached.





It was a relief when they left the city behind and began driving through empty land that looked like desert, antelopes and cows nibbling the stingy plant life.





—Jennifer Egan, A Visit from the Goon Squad



The complexities of London’s electricity network were such that a few motes of nighttime brightness remained in Saeed and Nadia’s locality, at properties on the edges, near where barricades and checkpoints were manned by armed government forces, and in scattered pockets that were for some reason difficult to disconnect, and in the odd building here and there where an enterprising migrant had rigged together a connection to a still-active high-voltage line, risking and in some cases succumbing to electrocution.





—Mohsin Hamid, Exit West




Harmony and Conflict Between Character and Setting

If character is the foreground of fiction, setting is the background, and as in a painting’s composition, the foreground may be in harmony or in conflict with the background. If we think of the famous impressionist painting Sunday Afternoon on the Grande Jatte by Georges Seurat, for example, we think of the harmony of women with light-scattering parasols strolling in a summer landscape under light-scattering trees. By contrast, the Spanish painter Francisco Cortijo has a portrait of a girl on her Communion day, Primera comunión. She sits curled and ruffled, in a lace mantilla, on an ornately carved Mediterranean throne against a backdrop of stark, harshly lit, poverty-stricken shacks.

I do think character emerges from place. So much emerges from place, actually. A writer can mine much from a given locale: narrative voice, metaphors large and small, characters, conflict, and more.



—Andrew Scott



Mood within a setting will most often represent an emotional response of the protagonist whose view we share. In fiction, period, place, mood, character, and action impinge on each other constantly, each reinforcing, qualifying, contradicting, and creating the other.


The apartment Helena rented in Salvador had high ceilings, marble floors, vast windows. It always looked cool, even when the blaze of the Brazilian summer crept inside in the late afternoon. If she leaned from her balcony, she could see the former convent that curved around her street cul-de-sac; she could see over the red tile roofs of the building across the way to where the harbor opened into ocean.





—Lauren Groff, “Salvador”




Here period, time of day, and place work with details to create an atmosphere of light and calm in what the protagonist sees: high ceilings, vast windows, across the way, opened into ocean. In Don DeLillo’s Underworld, a more ambivalent mind observes the day:


The old nun rose at dawn, feeling her pain in every joint. She’d been rising at dawn since her days as postulant, kneeling on hardwood floors to pray. First she raised the shade. That’s creation out there, little green apples and infectious disease.





Two things to notice: first, that character, setting, and mood occur simultaneously in these rich and efficient passages and, second, that setting can be manipulated to mean either the expected or the unexpected. In the next passage, from “Chronopolis,” J. G. Ballard depicts a third character looking out his window and creates a cheerful prison:


Luckily, his cell faced south and sunlight traversed it for most of the day. He divided its arc into ten equal segments, the effective daylight hours, marking the intervals with a wedge of mortar prised from the window ledge. Each segment he further subdivided into twelve smaller units.





By contrast with the prison’s paradox, in this picture of war, the hardships of soldiers may match our expectations, but they too are given emotional weight and depth through the use of detail:


The rain fed fungus that grew in the men’s boots and socks, and their socks rotted, and their feet turned white and soft so that the skin could be scraped off with a fingernail, and Stink Harris woke up screaming one night with a leech on his tongue. When it was not raining, a low mist moved across the paddies, blending the elements into a single gray element, and the war was cold and pasty and rotten.





—Tim O’Brien, Going After Cacciato




Where disharmony between setting and the character’s mood occurs, there is already “narrative content,” or the makings of a story. The nun’s pain and her ambivalence toward creation, and the soldiers’ grim condition, already introduce conflict. But as readers we might also reasonably expect that a prison is not going to be a reasonably structured space, and we are not surprised when, in the light and pleasant room of the Groff story, a man soon appears staring up at the protagonist from the street.

Notice that in all of these passages, harmony, familiarity, and ease or their opposites are not measured in terms of either the reader’s or the writer’s comfort with such places, but are an attitude of the character whose viewpoint we share. It is also possible to set up a disconnect between the character’s view and the reader’s, signaling a whole or partial judgment on that character. In my novel Cutting Stone, for example, which is set in Arizona in 1914, we know that Eleanor Poindexter is an Irish Catholic socialite from Baltimore, exiled in a dusty little desert town. Seeking the solace of her church, she ventures to the Mexican quarter:


The brown cubes were patched with corrugated metal, cratewood, rags. From one of them a woman’s voice kept up its scolding. A rooster with bald thighs scratched at the threshold of the first hut she passed. Across the street a male child, not yet steady on its feet and wearing nothing but an undershirt with a hole at center belly, hung on the cloth door and regarded her without interest. It all seemed remotely familiar—as if, had she been asked what one could expect to find on the central street of a desert shantytown, she might with a little effort have come up with a molting rooster and a baby in a ragged undershirt.





Here Eleanor, in a setting alien to her, finds the “familiar” in her own prejudices, and there is consequently a distance created between her and the reader. As you might expect, the novel concerns her transformation, until she comes to choose a life among the Mexicans.

In a similar vein, reader anticipation can be aroused by an unspecified narrator’s insistent single attitude toward setting; in this case the reader, being a contrary sort of person, is likely to anticipate a change or paradox. Here is the opening paragraph of E. M. Forster’s A Passage to India:


Except for the Malabar Caves—and they are twenty miles off—the city of Chandrapore presents nothing extraordinary. Edged rather than washed by the River Ganges, it trails for a couple of miles along the bank, scarcely distinguishable from the rubbish it deposits so freely. . . . The streets are mean, the temples ineffective, and though a few fine houses exist they are hidden away in gardens or down alleys whose filth deters all but the invited guest.





The narrative continues in this way, an unrelenting portrait of the dreariness of Chandrapore—made of mud, mud moving, abased, monotonous, rotting, swelling, shrinking, low but indestructible form of life. The images are so one-sided, so fanatical a condemnation, that we are led to expect (accurately again) that in the pages that follow somehow mystery and beauty will break forth. Likewise, but in the opposite way, the opening pages of Virginia Woolf’s Mrs. Dalloway burst with affirmation, the beauty of London and spring, love of life and love of life again! We suspect (accurately once more) that death and hatred lurk.

Any well-known city is a challenge to use as a setting. . . . I write about the sweet, dark heart of this place and about the sorts of things and people who are living their lives well beyond the view of the tourist.



—Barb Johnson



Realistic setting may be constructed from memory or research, but an intensely imagined fantasy world makes new and different boundaries for the mind. Long ago and far away, a dream, hell, heaven, a garbage shaft, Middle Earth, Hogwarts Boarding School, and the subconscious have all been the settings of effective fiction. Even Utopian fiction, set Nowhere (with a capital N, or spelled backward, as in Samuel Butler’s Erehwon), happens in a nowhere with distinct physical characteristics. Outer space is an exciting setting precisely because its physical boundary is the edge of our known world. Obviously this does not absolve the writer of the necessity of giving outer space its own characteristics, atmosphere, and logic. If anything, these must be more intensely realized within the fiction, since we have less to borrow from in our own experience.


The westering sun shining on his face woke Shevek as the dirigible, clearing the last high pass of the Ne Theras, turned due south. . . . He pressed his face to the dusty window, and sure enough, down there between two low rusty ridges was a great walled field, the Port. He gazed eagerly, trying to see if there was a spaceship on the pad. Despicable as Urras was, still it was another world; he wanted to see a ship from another world, a voyager across the dry and terrible abyss, a thing made by alien hands. But there was no ship in the Port.





—Ursula Le Guin, The Dispossessed




We may be in outer space, unfamiliar even to the protagonist, but we are on a planet that shares certain aspects with our own—a “westering” sun, a mountain pass, a wall, a field, ridges—and we feel the character’s expectations as very like our own in a new environment. And “sure enough,” we’ve gone someplace specific and real. It is that specific reality that allows us to get lost in the story.


Symbolic Place

Since the rosy-fingered dawn illuminated the battlefield of Homer’s Iliad (and no doubt well before that), poets and writers have used the context of history, night, storm, stars, sea, city, and plain to give their stories a sense of reaching out toward the universe.

Sometimes the universe resonates with an answer. In his plays Shakespeare consistently drew parallels between the conflicts of heavenly bodies and the conflicts of nations and characters. In “The Life You Save May Be Your Own,” Flannery O’Connor uses the elements in a consciously Shakespearean way, letting the setting reflect and affect the theme. In this classic story the protagonist con man, Mr. Shiftlet, first woos and then abandons a disabled country girl and, stealing her car, drives on in weather that “grows hot and sultry.” Shiftlet prays that the Lord will “break forth and wash the slime from this earth.” The behavior of the elements, in ironic juxtaposition to the title, shows that the life Shiftlet damns may be his own.


After a few minutes there was a guffawing peal of thunder from behind and fantastic raindrops, like tin-can tops, crashed over the rear of Mr. Shiftlet’s car.





Yet the reader is never aware of this symbolic intrusion. The setting throughout remains natural and convincing, until the heavens are ready to make their guffawing comment.

I acknowledge this symbolic possibility in the interests of inclusion. Symbolic setting is a difficult and advanced technique, fine for Shakespeare and O’Connor, but not something I would advise for a beginning writer. Still, one great advantage of being a writer is that you may create the world. Places, time, and the elements have the emotional effect you give them in language. Charles Baxter, in Burning Down the House, admonishes the writer toward the finest ideal of the process:


The object and things surrounding the fictional characters have the same status and energy as the characters themselves. Setting in the way that I want to define it—is not just a place where the action happens. (Nor is the Earth just a prized location where our lives happen to happen.)





SOME ASPECTS OF NARRATIVE TIME

Literature is, by virtue of its nature and subject matter, tied to time in a way that the other arts are not. A painting traditionally represents a frozen instant of time, and the viewing time is a matter of the viewer’s choice; no external standard must be satisfied in order to say that you have seen the painting. Music takes a certain time to hear, and the timing of the various parts is of utmost importance; but the time scheme is generally self-enclosed and makes no reference to time in the world outside itself. A book, too, takes time to read, but the reader chooses his or her rate and may put it down and take it up at will.

But in the narrative itself, the vital temporal relationship is to content time, the period covered in the story. It is possible to write a story that takes about twenty minutes to read and covers about twenty minutes of action (Jean-Paul Sartre performed experiments in this durational realism), but no one has suggested such a relationship as a fictional requirement. Sometimes the period is telescoped, sometimes stretched. The history of the world up to now can be covered in a sentence, or four seconds of crisis may take a chapter. It’s even possible to do both at once. William Golding’s entire novel Pincher Marin takes place between the time the drowning protagonist begins to take off his boots and the moment he dies with his boots still on. But when asked by a student, “How long does it really take?” Golding replied, “Eternity.”


Summary and Scene

Summary and scene are methods of treating time in fiction. A summary covers a relatively long period of time in relatively short compass; a scene deals at length with a relatively short period of time.

Summary is a useful and often necessary device: to give information, fill in a character’s background, let us understand a motive, alter pace, create a transition, leap moments or years. Here is an example of a summary that covers fifty years and gives us all the background and history of the situation we need to know in three sentences:


For fifty years now, nag, nag, nag and harp, harp, harp. No matter what my sister did, it wasn’t good enough for my mother, or for my father either. She moved to England to get away, and married an Englishman, and when he died, she married another Englishman, but that wasn’t enough.





—Lydia Davis, “My Sister and the Queen of England”




It is the next line that introduces the particular scene we are to be concerned with: “Then she was awarded the Order of the British Empire.”

Summary can be called the mortar of the story, but scenes are the building blocks. Scene, which involves an action, is the crucial means of allowing your readers to experience the story with the characters; and though summary may be a useful narrative tool, scene is always necessary to fiction, for it allows the reader to see, hear, and sense the drama moment to moment. Jerome Stern, in Making Shapely Fiction, observes that, like a child in a tantrum, when you want everyone’s full attention, you “make a scene,” using the writer’s full complement of “dialogue, physical reactions, gestures, smells, sounds, and thoughts.”

It is quite possible to write a story in a single scene, without any summary at all. It is not possible to write a successful story entirely in summary. One of the common errors of beginning fiction writers is to summarize event rather than realize them as moments.

In the following paragraphs from Margaret Atwood’s Lady Oracle, the narrator has been walking home from her Brownie troop with older girls who tease and terrify her with threats of a bad man.


The snow finally changed to slush and then to water, which trickled down the hill of the bridge in two rivulets, one on either side of the path; the path itself turned to mud. The bridge was damp, it smelled rotten, the willow branches turned yellow, the skipping ropes came out. It was light again in the afternoons, and on one of them, when for a change Elizabeth hadn’t run off but was merely discussing the possibility with the others, a real man actually appeared.





He was standing at the far side of the bridge, a little off the path, holding a bunch of daffodils in front of him. He was a nice-looking man, neither old nor young, wearing a good tweed coat, not at all shabby or disreputable. He didn’t have a hat on, his taffy-colored hair was receding and the sunlight gleamed on his high forehead.





The first paragraph of this quotation covers the way things were over a period of a few months and then makes a transition to one of the afternoons; the second paragraph specifies a particular moment. Notice that although the summary sets us at a distance from the action, sense details remain necessary to its life: snow, path, bridge, willow branches, skipping ropes. These become more sharply focused as we concentrate on a particular moment. More importantly, the scene is introduced when the moment of confrontation occurs. That the threatened bad man does appear and that he is surprisingly innocuous promises a turn of events and a change in the relationship among the girls. We need to see the moment when this change occurs.

The myth of exoticism is busted immediately when you go to Calcutta, India, and ask someone there to tell you what’s exotic, and they’ll say, “Iowa!” Every place that’s not yours is exotic.



—Bob Shacochis



Throughout Lady Oracle, which is by no means unusual in this respect, the pattern recurs: a summary leading up to, and followed by, a scene that represents a turning point.


My own job was fairly simple. I stood at the back of the archery range, wearing a red leather apron, and rented out the arrows. When the barrels of arrows were almost used up, I’d go down to the straw targets. . . .





The difficulty was that we couldn’t make sure all the arrows had actually been shot before we went to clear the targets. Rob would shout, “Bows DOWN, please, arrows OFF the string,” but occasionally someone would let an arrow go, on purpose or by accident. This was how I got shot. We’d pulled the arrows and the men were carrying the barrels back to the line; I was replacing a target face, and I’d just bent over.





The summaries in these passages are of the two most common types. The summary in the first passage is sequential; it relates events in a sequence but compresses them: snow finally changed to slush and then to water, willow branches turned yellow, skipping ropes came out—the transition from winter to spring is made in a paragraph. The summary in the second excerpt is circumstantial; it describes the general circumstances during a period of time: this is what usually or frequently happened. The narrator stood at the back of the range, then went to clear the targets, and Rob would shout. Again, when the narrator arrives at an event that changes her circumstance (I got shot), she focuses on a particular moment: I was replacing a target face, and I’d just bent over.

To clarify the difference between summary and scene, compare the ideas of sequence, circumstance, and scene to the process of your own memory, which also drastically condenses. You might think of your own past as a movement through time: I was born in Arizona and lived there with my parents until I was eighteen; then I spent three years in New York before going on to England. Or you might remember the way things were during a period of that time: In New York we used to go down to Broadway for a midnight snack, and Judy would always dare us to some nonsense or other before we got back to the dorm. But when you think of the events that signally altered your life, your memory will present you with a scene: Then one afternoon Professor Bovie stopped me in the hall after class and wagged his glasses at me. “Have you thought about studying in England?”

The function of summary, both sequential and circumstantial, is precisely to heighten scene. It may be used both before and within scene to suggest a relation to the past, to intensify mood, to delay while augmenting our anticipation of what will happen next. It will still be in the scene that we experience the drama—discovery, decision, potential for change—that engages our attention. This example from Rosellen Brown’s Before and After, in which a father disturbed by reports of a young girl’s murder is checking out his son’s car in a dark garage, does all three.


The snow was lavender where the light came down on it, like the weird illumination you see in planetariums that changes every color and makes white electric blue. Jacob and I loved to go to the science museum in Boston—not that long ago he had been at that age when the noisy saga of whirling planets and inexplicable anti-gravitational feats, narrated by a man with a deep official-facts voice, was thrilling. He was easily, unstintingly thrilled, or used to be.





Notice how Brown uses brief summaries both of the way things used to be (circumstantial) and the way things have changed over time (sequential), as well as images of time, weather, and even the whirling cosmos, to rouse our ear toward the “instant” in which major change occurs:


At the last instant I thought I’d have a look at the trunk. I was beginning to feel relief wash over me like that moon-white air outside—a mystery, still, where he might be, but nothing suspicious. The trunk snapped open and rose with the slow deliberation of a drawbridge, and then I thought I’d fall over for lack of breath. Because I knew I was looking at blood.





Examining your own mind for the three kinds of memory—sequential, circumstantial, and scene—will help make evident the necessity of scene in fiction. The moments that altered your life you remember at length and in detail. Your memory tells you a story, and it is great storyteller.


White Space

It was the tradition of the Victorian novel to be divided into chapters with no internal breaks in the narrative, and that habit carried into the twentieth century. This meant that if a character or characters needed to go from here to there in order to get from one scene to another, whether across the country or up the stairs, from night to morning or from childhood to adulthood, the reader needed to be taken with them. Nothing is clumsier than to end one paragraph with the family piling into the car and begin the next with “Three hours later they arrived in . . .” In such a case the trick is to create the intervening space or time quickly, with an image or two, an indication of mood, a sense of the miles or years involved. Here is E. M. Forster in A Passage to India demonstrating the technique on the way to a crucial scene:


They meant to climb to the rocking-stone on the summit, but it was too far, and they contented themselves with the big group of caves. En route for these, they encountered several isolated caves, which the guide persuaded them to visit, but really there was nothing to see; they lit a match, admired its reflection in the polish, tested the echo and came out again. Aziz was “pretty sure they should come on some interesting old carvings soon,” but only meant he wished there were some carvings.





Forster is a master of making the trip itself meaningful, but many of us are not, and some transitions read as if they are there for their own sake and merely drag the story along. I used to sweat and suffer when I came to write a passage that needed simultaneously to condense and stretch the time in such a way.

But now familiarity with film has accustomed us so thoroughly to the “cut to” that this effort is no longer needed. Early moving pictures would grant us a gradual transition from scene to scene: a slow fade-out, a black screen, a “swipe” or “cameo” shot. Now, and for the better part of a century, the film scene shifts abruptly, and we understand that a change of light or setting takes us instantly to the next day, the next locale. Fiction has adopted the white space as the narrative equivalent of the cut-to, and as readers we understand that a visual break in the lines of prose means that we begin fresh, the next city over, the next morning, in somebody’s else’s point of view.

Here, in Aravind Adiga’s Selection Day, the scene does all three and shifts mood besides—moves several hours in time, from a cricket field to a rich man’s apartment, from the viewpoint of a minor character to that of the protagonist, and from violence to shame, with the simple cut-to of white space:


Deennawaz was about to turn around to ask again for water, when he felt something hit him at the top of his neck, pounding him like a sledgehammer, compressing the length of his backbone, until the tip of his spine almost pierced through skin.





The cricket stopped when the players heard the scream.





Instructing his father to stand still for a moment, Manju signed the guard’s register for both of them. The elevator waited behind a collapsible lattice gate. There was no elevator boy inside: just a cold wooden stool. Getting in, Manju held the lattice gate open for his father.





Sometimes, of course, the transition itself is part of the story and contains its own necessary scene. But if not, if you find yourself bored with the task of getting the characters from here to there or then to now, you will probably bore your reader too. Instead, try leaping across the white space.


Flashback

Flashback is one of the most magical of fiction’s contrivances, easier and more effective in this medium than in any other, because the reader’s mind is a swifter mechanism for getting to the past than anything that has been devised for stage or even film. All you must do is give the reader a smooth passage into the past, and the force of the story will be time-warped to whenever and wherever you want it.

Nevertheless, many beginning writers overuse flashbacks. This happens because flashback can be a useful way to provide what has come to be known as backstory—information on a character’s childhood or motivation or the history of events—and is often seen as the easiest or only way. It isn’t. Dialogue, brief summary, a reference or detail can often tell us all we need to know, and when that would suffice, a flashback becomes cumbersome, taking us from the present where the story and our interest lie. These intrusive passages tend to come early in the story, before we are caught up in the action.

Backstory should only be employed to advance the front story.



—William H. Coles



You as the writer may need to know a great deal about your main characters’ backgrounds, experiences, disappointments, or traumas, but it may take only the lightest of sketching to tell us readers what we need to know. After so much television, so many movies, books, and news items, we are so narrative-literate that we don’t need all the explanatory transitions. We get it in a flash. Two and a half sentences and we know what kind of marital trouble these two are in, whether these two others will kiss, how long it will take for the sinner to be punished or the hero tested.

If you are tempted to use flashback to fill in the whole past, try using your journal to explore background. Write down everything you can think of, fast. Then take a hard look at it to decide just how little of it you can use, how much of it the reader can infer, how you can sharpen an image to imply a past incident or condense a grief into a line of dialogue. Trust the reader’s experience of life to understand events from attitude, gesture, tone. And keep the present of the story moving.

When flashback is used effectively, to reveal something from the past at the right time, it does not so much take us from as contribute to the central action of the story: as readers we suspend the forward motion of the narrative in our minds while our understanding of it deepens.

If you find you need an excursion into the past to reveal why a character reacts as she does, or how totally he is misunderstood by those around him, or some other point of emotional significance, then there are several ways to get the reader to cooperate.

Provide some sort of transition. A connection between what’s happening in the present and what happened in the past will help transport the reader, just as it does the character.

Avoid blatant transitions such as “Henry thought back to the time . . .” or “I drifted back in memory . . .” Assume the reader’s intelligence and ability to follow your leap.


The kid in the high-tops lifted off on the tips of his toes and slam-dunked it in.





Joe’d done that once, in the lot off Seymour Street, when he was still four inches shorter than Ruppert and had already started getting zits.





A graceful transition to the past allows you to summarize necessary background quickly. In this example from Elizabeth Strout’s “Windmills,” the protagonist, Patty, ranges in her mind from her father’s death to the distressing events of the day to a whole telegraphed précis of family relationships:


The sun had set, and by the time Patty was halfway home—past the windmills—the full moon was starting to rise. The night her father died the moon was full, and in Patty’s mind every time the moon became full she felt that her father was watching her. She wiggled her fingers from the steering wheel as a hello to him. Love you, Daddy. . . .





At home, the lights she’d left on made her house appear cozy; it was one of many things she had learned about living alone, leaving lights on. And yet as she put her pocketbook down, moved through the living room, the ghastliness descended; her day had been a bad one. Lila Lane had shaken her profoundly, and what if the girl reported her, told the principle that Patty had called her a piece of filth? She could do that, Lila Lane. She was up to doing that. Patty’s sister had been no help, there was no point calling her other sister, who lived in L.A. and never had time to talk, and her mother—oh, her mother.





Here a long past memory of the father and a more immediate memory of the day prepare us for events of the story that are already in motion. It takes the merest brushstroke to signal the family dynamic of the four women, as opposed to Patty’s loving memory of her father.

If you are writing in the past tense, begin the flashback in the past perfect (she had driven, he’d worked) and use the construction “had + (verb)” two or three times more. Then switch to the simple past (she raced, he crept); the reader will be with you. If you are writing in the present tense, you may want to keep the whole flashback in the past tense.

Try to avoid a flashback within a flashback. If you find yourself tempted by this awkward shape, it probably means you’re trying to make flashback carry too much of the story.

When the flashback ends, be very clear that you are catching up to the present again. Repeat an action or image that the reader will remember belongs to the basic time period of the story (she wiggled her fingers, Patty’s sister had been no help). It may take very little to jog the reader’s memory, even if the flashback was on the long side. If in the present time of the story the character is eating dinner in a fancy restaurant, for instance, you could bring us back into the present by mentioning the food he chews, the sound of silverware, the look on the face of the person across the table. Often simply beginning the paragraph with “Now . . .” will accomplish the reorientation.


Slow Motion

Flashback and cut-to are terms borrowed from film, and I want to borrow one more—slow motion—to point out a correlation between narrative time and significant detail.

When people experience moments of great intensity, their senses become especially alert and they register, literally, more than usual. In extreme crisis people have the odd sensation that time is slowing down, and they see, hear, smell, and remember ordinary sensations with extraordinary clarity. This psychological fact can work artistically in reverse: you can create the intensity by using detail with special focus and precision. The phenomenon is so universal that it has become a standard film technique to register a physical blow, a gunshot, sexual passion, or extreme fear in slow motion. The technique works forcefully in fiction. Recall the quotation from Rosellen Brown, where the trunk “snapped open and rose with the slow deliberation of a drawbridge.”

Ian McEwan, in A Child in Time, demonstrates the technique:


He was preparing to overtake when something happened—he did not quite see what—in the region of the lorry’s wheels, a hiatus, a cloud of dust, and then something black and long snaked through a hundred feet towards him. It slapped the windscreen, clung there a moment and was whisked away before he had time to understand what it was. And then—or did this happen in the same moment?—the rear of the lorry made a complicated set of movements, a bouncing and swaying, and slewed in a wide spray of sparks, bright even in sunshine. Something curved and metallic flew off to one side. So far Stephen had had time to move his foot towards the brake, time to notice a padlock swinging on a loose flange, and “Wash me please” scrawled in grime. There was a whinnying of scraped metal and new sparks, dense enough to form a white flame which seemed to propel the rear of the lorry into the air.





I believe if you get the landscape right, the characters will step out of it, and they’ll be in the right place. The story will come from the landscape.



—Annie Proulx



Anyone who has faced some sort of accident can identify with the experience of sensuous slowdown McEwan records. But the slow-motion technique works also with experiences most of us have not had and to which we must submit in imagination:


Blood was spurting from an artery in my left leg. I could not see it, and I do not recall how I knew it . . . for a short time I was alone with Patrick. I told myself I was in good hands, but I did not do this with words; I surrendered myself. I focused only on breathing. I slowed my breathing, and tried to remain absolutely in the present, in each moment. . . . That waiting to die or stay alive was like getting an injection as a child, when you first learned not to think, but to gather yourself into the present, to breathe slowly, to relax your muscles, even your arm as the nurse swabbed it with alcohol, to feel the cool alcohol, to smell it, to feel your feet on the floor and see the color of the wall, and nothing else as your slow breathing opened you up to the incredible length and breadth and depth of one second.





—Andre Dubus, “Breathing”




The technique will work as well when the intensity or trauma of the moment is not physical but emotional:


They were in the deep sleep of midnight when Pauline came quietly into her son’s room and saw that there were two in his bed. She turned on the light. The room was cold and stuffy; warm in the core of it was the smell of a body she had known since she gave birth to him, unmistakable to her as the scent that leads a bitch to her puppy, and it was mingled with the scents of sexuality caressed from the female nectary. The cat was a rolled fur glove in an angle made by Sasha’s bent knees. The two in the bed opened their eyes; they focussed out of sleep and saw Pauline. She was looking at them, at their naked shoulders above the covers.





—Nadine Gordimer, A Sport of Nature




Central to this technique are the alert but matter-of-fact acceptance of the event and the observation of small, sometimes apparently random, details. The characters do not say, “Oh my God, we’re going to die!” or “What an outrage!” Instead they record a padlock swinging, the cool feel of an alcohol swab, a cat rolled into the angle of bent knees.


Beginning writers often skimp on the elements of setting and time, probably out of dreary memories of long descriptions they have read. Certainly, we have yawned over passages in which authors indulge themselves in plum-colored homilies on the beauties of nature or the wealth of decor. But when atmosphere is well created, we do not experience it as description; we simply experience it. Just as dialogue that only offers information is too inert for the purposes of fiction, so too is description that only describes. The full realization of place and period, the revelation of a character through his house or of emotion through the weather, the advancement of plot through changes in season and history, are among the pleasures of both writer and reader. Once you become adept at the skill of manipulating atmosphere, you will find that the necessity of setting your story in some particular place at some specific time is a liberating opportunity.



SUGGESTED STORIES



“A Serious Talk”

Raymond Carver





“The Bella Lingua”

John Cheever





“Mrs. Dutta Writes a Letter”

Chitra Banerjee Divakaruni





“Battle Royal”

Ralph Ellison





“Car Crash While Hitchhiking”

Denis Johnson





“The Interpreter of Maladies”

Jhumpa Lahiri





“Real Women Have Bodies”

Carmen Maria Machado





“A Very Old Man with Enormous Wings”

Gabriel García Márquez





“You’re Ugly Too”

Lorrie Moore





“The Masked Marvel’s Last Toehold”

Richard Selzer





WRITING PROMPTS



1. Consider the ideas of home, homesickness, foreignness, alienation. Place a character in a scene where these ideas are evoked by place, time, and weather.

2. Two characters are in conflict over a setting. One wants to stay, the other wants to go. The more interesting the setting you choose, the more interesting the scene will be. Let the disagreement escalate. Resolve it. Who wins? How? Why?

3. Write a scene with a flashback in which the information about the past is crucial to understanding the present.

4. Place a character in a territory that has been stripped of its usual characteristics: a beach without water, a forest without trees, a city without buildings (whatever landscape you please). What does your character do there?

5. The far past or the far future. Write a scene in which the members of a group disagree. How are conflicts differently resolved in this time period from how they would be in our familiar society?

6. Write a scene from the perspective of an adult or old person looking back on her/his childhood or youth. Let the difference in the older person’s current setting color the recollection.

7. Imagine an accident of any seriousness—a cut finger or a car crash, a broken vase or a house fire, and write it in several versions: a one-sentence summary, a paragraph, a scene, slow motion. Think of it in film terms, the camera moving from panoramic shot to middle shot, zooming in ever nearer till it ends it extreme close-up.





