6 THE TOWER AND THE NET: Plot and Structure

6: The Tower and the Net



PLOT AND STRUCTURE



Conflict, Crisis, and Resolution

The Arc of the Story

Patterns of Power

Connection and Disconnection

Story Form as a Check Mark

Story and Plot

The Short Story and the Novel

Types of Fiction

It seems likely that the earliest storytellers—in the tent or the harem, around the campfire or on the Viking ship—told stories out of an impulse to tell stories. They made themselves popular by distracting their listeners from a dull or dangerous evening with heroic exploits and a skill at creating suspense: What happened next? And after that? And then what happened?

Natural storytellers are still around, and a few of them are very rich. Some are on the best-seller list; more are in television and film; some are in comic books and video games. But it’s probable that your impulse to write has little to do with the desire or the skill to work out a plot. On the contrary, you want to write because you are a sensitive observer. You have something to say that does not answer the question What happened next? You share with most—and the best—contemporary fiction writers a sense of the injustice, the absurdity, and the beauty of the world, and you want to register your protest, your laughter, your affirmation.

Yet readers still want to wonder what happened next, and unless you make them wonder, they will not turn the page. You must master plot, because no matter how profound or illuminating your vision of the world may be, you cannot convey it to those who do not read you.

When editors take the trouble to write a rejection letter to a young author (and they do so only when they think the author talented), the gist most frequently is: “This piece is sensitive (perceptive, vivid, original, brilliant, funny, moving), but it is not a story.”

How do you know when you have written a story? And if you’re not a natural-born wandering minstrel, can you go about learning to write one?

It’s interesting that we react with such different attitudes to the words “formula” and “form” as they apply to a story. A formula story is hackwork: to write one, you check out what’s on the rack at the supermarket checkout, read half a dozen romances, fantasies, or space stories, make a list of what kinds of characters and situations the editors buy, shuffle nearly identical characters around in slightly altered situations, and sit back to hope for a check. Whereas form is a term of the highest artistic approbation, even reverence, with overtones of order, harmony, model, archetype.

And “story” is a “form” of literature. Like a face, it has necessary features in a necessary harmony. We’re aware of the infinite variety of human faces, aware of their unique individuality, which is so powerful that once you know a face you can recognize it twenty years after you last saw it despite the changes it has undergone. We’re aware that minute alterations in the features can express grief, anger, or joy. If you place side by side two photographs of, say, Gal Gadot and Geronimo, you are instantly aware of the fundamental differences of age, race, sex, class, and century; yet these two faces are more like each other than either is like a foot or a fern, both of which have their own distinctive forms. Every face has two eyes, a nose between them, a mouth below, a forehead, two cheeks, two ears, and a jaw. If a face is missing one of these features, you may say, “I love this face in spite of its lacking a nose,” but you must acknowledge the in spite of. You can’t simply say, “This is a wonderful face.”

The same is true of a story. You might say, “I love this piece even though there’s no crisis action in it.” You can’t simply say, “This is a wonderful story.”



CONFLICT, CRISIS, AND RESOLUTION

One useful way of describing the necessary features of story form is to speak of conflict, crisis, and resolution.

Conflict is, as we’ve seen, a fundamental element of fiction. Playwright and director Elia Kazan describes it simply as “two dogs fighting over a bone.” William Faulkner reminds us that in addition to a conflict of wills, fiction shows “the heart in conflict with itself”; that is, conflict seethes both within and between characters. In life, “conflict” often carries negative connotations, yet in fiction, be it comic or tragic, dramatic conflict is fundamental, because in literature only trouble is interesting.

I like the definition of tension from physics: two equal forces pulling in opposite directions. Tension between forces: Expression versus repression. Motion versus status. Not knowing versus knowing.



—Debra Monroe



Only trouble is interesting. This is not so in life. Life offers periods of comfortable communication, peaceful pleasure, and productive work, all of which are extremely interesting to those involved. But passages about such times by themselves make for dull reading; they can be used as lulls in an otherwise tense situation, as a resolution, even as a hint that something awful is about to happen. They cannot be used as a whole plot.

Suppose, for example, you go on a picnic. You find a beautiful deserted meadow with a lake nearby. The weather is splendid and so is the company. The food’s delicious, the water’s fine, and the insects have taken the day off. Afterward, someone asks you how your picnic was. “Terrific,” you reply, “really perfect.” No story.

Now suppose the next week you go back for a rerun. You set your picnic blanket on an anthill. You all race for the lake to get cold water on the bites, and one of your friends goes too far out on the plastic raft, which deflates. He can’t swim and you have to save him. On the way in you gash your foot on a broken bottle. When you get back to the picnic, the ants have taken over the cake and a possum has demolished the chicken. Just then the sky opens up. When you gather your things to race for the car, you notice an irritated bull has broken through the fence. The others run for it, but because of your bleeding heel the best you can do is hobble. You have two choices: try to outrun him or stand perfectly still and hope he’s interested only in a moving target. At this point, you don’t know if your friends can be counted on for help, even the nerd whose life you saved. Nor do you know if it’s true that a bull is attracted by the smell of blood.

A year later, assuming you’re around to tell about it, you are still saying, “Let me tell you what happened last year.” And your listeners are saying, “What a story!”

As Charles Baxter, in Burning Down the House, more vividly puts it:


Say what you will about it, Hell is story-friendly. If you want a compelling story, put your protagonist among the damned. The mechanisms of hell are nicely attuned to the mechanisms of narrative. Not so the pleasures of Paradise. Paradise is not a story. It’s about what happens when the stories are over.





If it takes trouble to make a picnic into a story, this is equally true of the great themes of life: birth, love, sex, work, and death. Here is a very interesting love story to live: Jan and Jon meet in college. Both are beautiful, intelligent, talented, popular, and well adjusted. They’re of the same race, class, religion, and political persuasion. They are sexually compatible. Their parents become fast friends. They marry on graduating, and both get rewarding work in the same city. They have three children, all of whom are healthy, happy, beautiful, intelligent, and popular; the children love and respect their parents to a degree that is the envy of everyone. All the children succeed in work and marriage. Jan and Jon die peacefully, of natural causes, at the same moment, at the age of eighty-two, and are buried in the same grave.

No doubt this love story is very satisfying to Jan and Jon, but you can’t make a novel of it. Great love stories involve intense passion and a monumental impediment to that passion’s fulfillment. So: they love each other passionately, but their parents are sworn enemies (Romeo and Juliet). Or: they love each other passionately, but he’s black and a foreigner, and he has an enemy who wants to punish him (Othello). Or: they love each other passionately, but she’s married (Anna Karenina). Or: he loves her passionately, but she falls in love with him only when she has worn out his passion (“Frankly, my dear, I don’t give a damn”).

In each of these plots, there is both intense desire and great danger in the pursuit of that desire; generally speaking, this shape holds true for all plots. It can be called 3-D: drama equals desire plus danger. One common fault of talented young writers is to create a main character who is essentially passive. This is understandable; as a writer you are an observer of human nature and activity, and so you identify easily with a character who observes, reflects, and suffers. But such a character’s passivity transmits itself to the page, and the story also becomes passive. Charles Baxter laments that “in writing workshops, this kind of story is often the rule rather than the exception.” He calls it “the fiction of finger-pointing”:


In such fiction, the plot involves a search for someone or something to blame as a cause of the protagonist’s unhappiness. That’s the whole story. When blame has been assigned, the story is over.





In such flawed stories, the central character (and by implication, the story’s author) seems to take no responsibility for what she or he wants to have happen. This is quite different from Aristotle’s rather startling claim that a man is his desire, or Robert Olen Butler’s definition of fiction as “the art of human yearning.”

In order to engage our attention and sympathy, the protagonist of fiction must want, and want intensely. The thing that the character wants need not be violent or spectacular; it is the intensity of the wanting that introduces an element of danger. She may want, like the protagonist in David Madden’s The Suicide’s Wife, no more than to get her driver’s license, but if so, she must feel that her identity and her future depend on her getting a driver’s license, while a corrupt highway patrolman tries to manipulate her. He may want, like Samuel Beckett’s Murphy, only to tie himself to his rocking chair and rock, but if so, he will also want a woman who nags him to get up and get a job. She may want, like the heroine of Margaret Atwood’s Bodily Harm, only to get away from it all for a rest, but if so, she must need rest for her survival, while tourists and terrorists involve her in machinations that begin in discomfort and end in mortal danger.

It’s important to realize that the great dangers in life and in literature are not necessarily the most spectacular. Another mistake frequently made by young writers is to think that they can best introduce drama into their stories by way of murderers, chase scenes, crashes, and vampires, the external stock dangers of pulp and TV. In fact, all of us know that the most profound impediments to our desire usually lie close to home, in our own bodies, personalities, friends, lovers, and families. More people will suffer a parent’s neglect than a stranger’s violence; fewer will die from a gunshot than a heart attack; more passion is destroyed at the breakfast table than in a time warp.

A frequently used critical tool divides possible conflicts into several basic categories: man against man, man against nature, man against society, man against machine, man against God, man against himself. Most stories fall into these categories, and in a literature class they can provide a useful way of discussing and comparing works. But the emphasis on categories can be misleading to new writers, insofar as it suggests that literary conflicts take place in these abstract, cosmic dimensions. A writer needs a specific story to tell, and if you sit down to pit “man” against “nature,” you will have less of a story than if you pit seventeen-year-old James Tucker of Weehawken, New Jersey, against a two-and-a-half-foot bigmouth bass in the backwoods of Toomsuba, Mississippi. (The value of specificity is a point to which we return again and again.)

Once conflict is established and developed in a story, the conflict must come to a crisis—the final turning point—and a resolution. Order is a major value that literature offers us, and order implies that the subject has been brought to closure. In life this never quite happens, but whether or not the lives of fictional characters end, the story does, and we are left with a satisfying sense of completion.

What follows are several ways—they are all essentially metaphors—of seeing this pattern of conflict-crisis-resolution in order to make the shape and its variations clearer, and particularly to indicate what a crisis action is.


The Arc of the Story

Novelist John L’Heureux says that a story is about a single moment in a character’s life that culminates in a defining choice, after which nothing will be the same again. Plotting is a matter of finding the decision points that lead to this final choice and choosing the best scenes through which to dramatize them.

The editor and teacher Mel McKee states flatly that “a story is a war. It is sustained and immediate combat.” He offers four imperatives for the writing of this “war” story:


(1) get your fighters fighting, (2) have something—the stake—worth their fighting over, (3) have the fight dive into a series of battles with the last battle in the series the biggest and most dangerous of all, (4) have a walking away from the fight.





The stake over which wars are fought is usually a territory, and it’s important that the “territory” in a story be as tangible and specific as the Gaza Strip. As in wars among nations, this territory can represent all sorts of serious abstractions—self-determination, domination, freedom, dignity, identity—but the action consists of soldiers fighting yard by yard over a particular piece of grass or sand.

And just as a minor “police action” may gradually escalate into a holocaust, story form follows its most natural order when each “complication” is bigger than the last. It begins with a ground skirmish, which does not decide the war. Then one side brings in spies, the other, guerrillas; these actions do not decide the war. So one side brings in the air force, and the other answers with antiaircraft. One side launches missiles, which are answered with rockets. One side has poison gas, and the other has a hand on the nuclear button. Metaphorically, this is what happens in a story. As long as one antagonist can recoup enough power to counterattack, the conflict goes on. But, at some point in the story, one of the antagonists will produce a weapon from which the other cannot recover. The crisis action is the last battle and makes the outcome inevitable; there can no longer be any doubt who wins the particular territory—though there can be much doubt about moral victory. When this has happened the conflict ends with a significant and permanent change—which is the definition, in fiction, of a resolution.

Notice that although a plot involves desire and a corresponding danger, it does not necessarily end happily if the desire is achieved, nor unhappily if it is not. The more morally complex the story, the less straightforward the idea of winning and losing becomes. Hamlet’s desire is to kill King Claudius, and for most of the play he is prevented from doing so—by other characters, by intrigues, and by his own mental state. When he finally succeeds, it is at the cost of every significant life in the play, including his own. Although the hero “wins” his particular “territory,” the play is a tragedy. In William Carlos Williams’s story “The Use of Force,” the war is fought over the territory of a little girl’s mouth, as the protagonist doctor battles to open it in order to check for diphtheria. The fight begins narrowing to that territory from the first paragraph. He fights with charm, a tongue depressor, a heavy spoon, and finally all his fury to save the “savage brat,” ending in success—and personal shame. In Margaret Atwood’s novel Bodily Harm, on the other hand, the heroine ends up in a political prison. Yet the discovery of her own strength and commitment is such that we know she has achieved salvation. What does my character win by losing his struggle, or lose by winning? John L’Heureux suggests the writer ask.

When you have a structure, it’s so much easier for the imagination to flourish.



—Ann Patchett




Patterns of Power

In his writing classes, novelist Michael Shaara used to describe a story as a power struggle between equal forces. It is imperative, he argued, that each antagonist have sufficient power that the reader is left in doubt about the outcome. We may be wholly in sympathy with one character and even reasonably confident that she or he will triumph. But the antagonist must represent a real and potent danger, and the pattern of the story’s complications will be achieved by shifting the power back and forth from one antagonist to the other. Finally, an action will occur that will shift the power irreversibly in one direction.

“Power” takes many forms—physical strength, charm, knowledge, moral power, wealth, ownership, rank, and so on. Most obvious is the power of brute force, as wielded by a dictator or a gang. Moral complication arises from the fact that nobody considers him/herself unjustified. Here is the mobster Max Blue in Leslie Marmon Silko’s novel Almanac of the Dead:


Max thinks of himself as an executive producer of one-night-only performances, dramas played out in the warm California night breezes, in a phone booth in downtown Long Beach. All Max had done was dial a phone number and listen while the pigeon repeats, “Hello? Hello? Hello? Hello?” until .22-pistol shots snap pop!pop! and Max hangs up.





Remember that “power” takes many forms, some of which have the external appearance of weakness. Anyone who has ever been tied to the demands of an invalid can understand this: sickness can be great strength. Weakness, need, passivity, an ostensible desire not to be any trouble to anybody—all these can be used as manipulative tools to prevent the protagonist from achieving his or her desire. Martyrdom is immensely powerful, whether we sympathize with it or not; a dying man absorbs all our energies.

The power of weakness has generated the central conflict in many stories and in such plays as Uncle Vanya and The Glass Menagerie. Here is a passage in which it is swiftly and deftly sketched:


This sepulchral atmosphere owed a lot to the presence of Mrs. Taylor herself. She was a tall, stooped woman with deep-set eyes. She sat in her living room all day long and chain-smoked cigarettes and stared out the picture window with an air of unutterable sadness, as if she knew things beyond mortal bearing. Sometimes she would call Taylor over and wrap her long arms around him, then close her eyes and hoarsely whisper, “Terence! Terence!” Eyes still closed, she would turn her head and resolutely push him away.





—Tobias Wolff, This Boy’s Life




Connection and Disconnection

Some students, as well as critics, object to the description of narrative as a war or power struggle. Seeing the world in terms of conflict and crisis, enemies and warring factions, not only constricts the possibilities of literature, they argue, but also promulgates an aggressive and antagonistic view of our own lives.

Speaking of the “gladiatorial view of fiction,” Ursula Le Guin writes:


People are cross-grained, aggressive, and full of trouble, the storytellers tell us; people fight themselves and one another, and their stories are full of their struggles. But to say that that is the story is to use one aspect of existence, conflict, to include and submerge other aspects, which it does not include and does not comprehend.





Romeo and Juliet is a story of the conflict between two families, and its plot involves the conflict of two individuals within those families. Is that all it involves? Isn’t Romeo and Juliet about something else, and isn’t it the something else that makes the otherwise trivial tale of a feud into a tragedy?

I’m indebted to dramatist Claudia Johnson for this further—and, it seems to me, crucial—insight about that “something else”: whereas the dynamic of the power struggle has long been acknowledged, narrative is also driven by a pattern of connection and disconnection between characters that is the main source of its emotional effect. Over the course of a story, and within the smaller scale of a scene, characters make and break emotional bonds of trust, love, understanding, or compassion with one another. A connection may be as obvious as a kiss or as subtle as a glimpse; a connection may be broken with an action as obvious as a slap or as subtle as an arched eyebrow.

In Romeo and Juliet, for example, the Montague and Capulet families are fiercely disconnected, but in spite of that the young lovers manage to connect. Throughout the play they meet and part, disconnect from their families in order to connect with each other, finally parting from life in order to be with each other eternally. Their ultimate departure in death reconnects the feuding families.

Johnson puts it this way:


Underlying any good story, fictitious or true—is a deeper pattern of change, a pattern of connection and disconnection. The conflict and the surface events are like waves, but underneath is an emotional tide, the ebb and flow of human connection.





While the pattern of either conflict or connection may dominate in a given work, a story which is only about the conflict will be shallow. There must be some deepening of our understanding of the characters, which is achieved not just through conflicts between good and bad, but through conflicts of one good versus another: does a man join up to serve his country, or stay home to help protect and raise his children? The writer strives to bring art to a level where a story is not just about the inevitable trouble, and not just about the conflict of good and bad, but also about the conflict of loyalty with loyalty, honesty with honesty, love with love.

You only see the structure in a badly structured story, and call it formula.



—Stephen Fischer



Human wills clash; human belonging is necessary. In discussing human behavior, psychologists speak in terms of “tower” and “network” patterns, the need to climb (which implies conflict) and the need for community, the need to win out over others and the need to belong to others—and these two forces also drive fiction. Like conflict and its complications, connection and its complications can produce a pattern of change, and both inform the process of change recorded in scene and story.


Story Form as a Check Mark

The nineteenth-century German critic Gustav Freytag analyzed plot in terms of a pyramid of five actions: an exposition, followed by a complication (or nouement, “knotting up,” of the situation), leading to a crisis, which is followed by a “falling action” or anticlimax, resulting in a resolution (or dénouement, “unknotting”).

In the compact short story form, the falling action is likely to be brief or nonexistent, and often the crisis action itself implies the resolution, which is not necessarily stated but exists as an idea established in the reader’s mind.

So for our purposes it is probably more useful to think of story shape not as a pyramid with sides of equal length but as an inverted check mark. If we take the familiar tale of Cinderella and diagram its power struggle using this model, we can see how the various elements reveal themselves even in this simple children’s story.



At the opening of the tale we’re given the basic conflict: Cinderella’s mother has died, and her father has married a brutal woman with two waspish daughters. Cinderella is made to do all the dirtiest and most menial work, and she weeps among the cinders. The Stepmother has on her side the strength of ugliness and evil (two very powerful qualities, in literature as in life). With her daughters she also has the strength of numbers, and she has parental authority. Cinderella has only beauty and goodness, but (in literature and life) these are also very powerful.

At the beginning of the struggle, the power is clearly on the Stepmother’s side. But the first event (action, battle) of the story is that an invitation arrives from the Prince, which explicitly states that all the ladies of the land are invited to a ball. Cinderella’s desire, we should note, is not to triumph over her Stepmother (though she eventually will, much to our satisfaction); such a desire would diminish her goodness. She simply wants to be relieved of her mistreatment. She wants equality, and the Prince’s invitation, which specifically gives her a right equal to the Stepmother’s and Stepdaughters’ rights, shifts the power to her.

The Stepmother takes the power back by blunt force: you may not go; you must get us ready to go. Cinderella does so, and the three leave for the ball.

Then what happens? The Fairy Godmother appears. It is very powerful to have magic on your side. The Fairy Godmother offers Cinderella a gown, glass slippers, and a coach with horses and footmen, giving her more force than she has yet had.

But the magic is not all-potent. It has a qualification that portends bad luck. It will last only until midnight (unlike the Stepmother’s authority), so Cinderella must leave the ball before the clock strikes twelve or risk exposure and defeat.

What happens next? She goes to the ball and the Prince falls in love with her—and love is an even more powerful weapon than magic in a literary war. In some versions of the tale, the Stepmother and Stepsisters marvel at the beauty of a Princess they don’t recognize, pointing to the irony of Cinderella’s new power.

And then? The magic quits. The clock strikes twelve, and Cinderella runs down the steps in her rags to her rats and pumpkin, losing a slipper, bereft of her power in every way.

And after that? The Prince sends out a messenger with the glass slipper and a dictum that every female in the land is to try on the slipper—a dramatic repetition of the invitation to the ball. Cinderella is again given her rights by royal decree.

What happens then? In most good retellings, the Stepmother also repeats her assumption of brute authority by hiding Cinderella away, while our expectation of triumph is tantalizingly delayed with grotesque comedy: one sister cuts off a toe, the other a heel, trying to fit into the heroine’s slipper.

After that, Cinderella tries on the slipper and it fits. This is the crisis action. Magic, love, and royalty join to recognize the heroine’s true self; evil, numbers, and authority are powerless against them. At this point, the power struggle has been decided; the outcome is inevitable. When the slipper fits, no further action can occur that will deprive Cinderella of her desire. Nothing will be the same again: the change in the lives of all concerned is significant and permanent.

Every dramatic story is a quest of some kind. No matter how complex the quest may be, it traditionally boils down to one character trying to achieve one overriding, all-important goal. . . . The quest succeeds or fails as a result of everything that happened along the way.



—Will Dunne



The tale has a brief “falling action” or “walking away from the fight”: the Prince sweeps Cinderella up on his white horse and gallops away to their wedding. The story comes to closure with the classic resolution of all comedy: they lived happily ever after.

If we also look at “Cinderella” in terms of connection/disconnection, we see a pattern as clear as that represented by the power struggle. The first painful disconnection is that Cinderella’s mother has died; her father has married (connected with) a woman who spurns (disconnects from) her; the Prince’s invitation offers connection; the Stepmother’s cruelty alienates again. The Fairy Godmother connects as a magical friend, but the disappearance of the coach and gown disconnect Cinderella temporarily from that grand and glorious fairy-tale union, marriage to the Prince. If we consult the emotions that this tale engenders—pity, anger, hope, fear, romance, anticipation, disappointment, triumph—we see that both the struggle between antagonist/protagonist and the pattern of alienation/connectedness is necessary to ensure, not only that there is an action, but also that we care about its outcome. The traditional happy ending is the grand connection, marriage; the traditional tragic outcome is the final disconnection, death.

Cinderella, and all fairy tales, typically begin with “telling,” straightforwardly setting up the situation. But a skilled writer can imply a complex of relationships involving a complex of connections and disconnections in a few sentences. Here, in Peggy Shinner’s “Tax Time,” relationships between narrator, father, stepmother, and mother reminiscent of Cinderella are sketched through the visual device of a tax accountant’s fingernails:


I notice Steve’s fingers. They’re wound around the pencil as he scribbles some figure from the computer. They’re short and stubby, like my father’s, and impeccably groomed. Does he get his nails done? Is that a vanity he allows himself? My father had a manicure once when he was seeing Rose, and at the time I saw it as jumping ship. He was, by slapping on some nail polish, trying to abandon his class for Rose’s—Rose, a woman who subscribed to the symphony, and tried to break his use of double negatives. He was also dandying himself up, something I wondered if he’d ever done for my mother when she was alive.





In the Poetics, the first extant work of Western literary criticism, Aristotle referred to the crisis action of a tragedy as a peripeteia, or reversal of the protagonist’s fortunes. Critics and editors agree that a reversal of some sort is necessary to all story structure, comic as well as tragic. Although the protagonist need not lose power, land, or life, he or she must in some significant way be changed or moved by the action. Aristotle specified that this reversal came about because of hamartia, which has for centuries been translated as a “tragic flaw” in the protagonist’s character, usually assumed to be, or defined as, pride. But more recent critics have defined and translated hamartia much more narrowly as a “mistake in identity” with the reversal coming about in a “recognition.”

It is true that recognition scenes have played a disproportionately large role in the crisis actions of plots both comic and tragic, and that these scenes frequently stretch credibility. In real life, you are unlikely to mistake the face of your mother, son, uncle, or even friend, and yet such mistakes have provided the turning point of many traditional plots. If, however, the notion of “recognition” is extended to more abstract and subtle realms, it becomes a powerful metaphor for moments of “realization.” In other words, the “recognition scene” in literature may stand for that moment in life when we “recognize” that the man we have considered good is evil, the event we have considered insignificant is crucial, the woman we have thought out of touch with reality is a genius, the object we have thought desirable is poison. There is in this symbolic way a recognition in “Cinderella.” We knew that she was essentially a princess, but until the Prince recognizes her as one, our knowledge must be frustrated.

James Joyce developed a similar idea when he spoke of, and recorded both in his notebooks and in his stories, moments of what he called epiphany. As Joyce saw it, epiphany is a crisis action in the mind, a moment when a person, an event, or a thing is seen in a light so new that it is as if it has never been seen before. At this recognition, the mental landscape of the viewer is permanently changed.

In many of the finest modern short stories and novels, the true territory of struggle is the main character’s mind, and so the real crisis action must occur there. Yet it is important to grasp that Joyce chose the word epiphany to represent this moment of reversal, and that the word means “a manifestation of a supernatural being”—specifically, in Christian doctrine, the manifestation of Christ to the gentiles. By extension, then, in a short story any mental reversal that takes place in the crisis of a story must be manifested; it must be triggered or shown by an action. The slipper must fit. It would not do if the Stepmother just happened to change her mind and give up the struggle; it would not do if the Prince just happened to notice that Cinderella looked like his love. The moment of recognition must be manifested in an action.

This point, that the crisis must be manifested or externalized in an action, is absolutely central, although sometimes difficult to grasp when the struggle of the story takes place in a character’s mind. In Tim O’Brien’s story “The Things They Carried,” for example, a young lieutenant’s desperate determination to change himself into a hardened leader is manifested in the action of burning photographs, letters from the girl he loved, and finally a village.

In a revenge story, it is easy to see how the conflict must come to crisis. The common revenge plot, from Hamlet to Black Panther, takes this form: someone important to a major character (self, father, sister, lover, friend) is killed, and for some reason the authorities who ought to administer justice can’t or won’t avenge the death. The hero or his antagonist must do so, then, and the crisis action is manifested in the flight of the arrow, the blast of the gun, the swallowing of the poison, whatever.

Conflict is no more monolithic than love is. . . . The variations are infinite; the point is that they may both be gentle, intelligent people, without easy access to automatic weapons, but between desire and fulfillment of that desire springs conflict.



—Cary Groner



But suppose the story is about a struggle between two brothers on a fishing trip, and the change that takes place is that the protagonist, believing for most of the action that he holds his older brother in contempt, discovers at the end of the story that they are deeply bound by love and family history. Clearly this change is an epiphany, a mental reversal. A writer insufficiently aware of the nature of crisis action might signal the change in a paragraph that begins “Suddenly Larry remembered their father and realized that Jeff was very much like him.” Well, unless that memory and that realization are manifested in an action, the reader is unable to share them, and therefore cannot be moved with the character.


Jeff reached for the old net and neatly bagged the trout, swinging round to offer it with a triumphant, “Got it! We got it, didn’t we?” The trout flipped and struggled, giving off a smell of weed and water and fecund mud. Jeff’s knuckles were lined with grime. The knuckles and the rich river smell filled him with a memory of their first fishing trip together, the sight of their father’s hands on the same scarred net.





Here the epiphany, a memory leading to a realization, is triggered by an action and sensory details that the reader can share; the reader now has a good chance of also being able to share the epiphany.

Yet much great fiction, and the preponderance of serious modern fiction, echoes life in its suggestion that there are no clear or permanent solutions, that the conflicts of character, relationship, and the cosmos cannot be permanently resolved. Most such stories end, in Vladimir Nabokov’s words, “with no definite full-stop, but with the natural motion of life.” None could end “they lived happily ever after” or even “they lived unhappily ever after.”

Yet the story form demands a resolution. Is there such a thing as a no-resolution resolution? Yes, and it has a very specific form. Go back to the metaphor “a story is a war.” After the skirmish, after the guerrillas, after the air strike, after the poison gas and the nuclear holocaust, imagine that the two surviving combatants, one on each side, emerge from their fallout shelters. They crawl, then stumble to the fence that marks the border. Each possessively grasps the barbed wire with a bloodied fist. The “resolution” of this battle is that neither side will ever give up and no one will ever win; there will never be a resolution. This is a distinct reversal (the recognition takes place in the reader’s mind) of the opening scene, in which it seemed eminently worthwhile to open a ground skirmish. In the statement of the conflict was an inherent possibility that one side or the other could win. Inherent in the resolution is a statement that no one can ever win. That is a distinct reversal and a powerful change.

This kind of story may offer readers an epiphany that the main character neglects to see. Such characters are often on the verge of change, yet lack the maturity or courage to take that difficult leap to recognition. In “Pharmacy,” the opening story of Elizabeth Strout’s collection Olive Kitteridge, for example, the protagonist is as nice a fellow as you could hope to meet: cordial, calm, self-effacing, happy in his job as a pharmacist, yet incapable of self-examination or self-knowledge. A neglectful husband and father, he is bewildered by his wife’s outbursts and his son’s sullenness; and, incapable of recognizing his own sexual impulses, he ends the story as it began, suggesting that he and his wife invite over a couple, of whom he is attracted to the woman. His wife will cook for them, of course. This unstated knowledge on the reader’s part, together with the closing dialogue—“We need to have them over soon”—clicks home the point that he cannot and will never change.

It can be, and has been, argued that in times of social suffering or cultural despair, the no-resolution resolution is the go-to form of the literary story, and especially of the short story.



STORY AND PLOT

So far, I have used the words “story” and “plot” interchangeably. The equation of the two terms is so common that they are often comfortably understood as synonyms. When an editor says, “This is not a story,” the implication is not that it lacks characters, theme, setting, or even incident, but that it has no plot.

Yet there is a distinction between the two terms, a distinction that, although simple in itself, gives rise to manifold subtleties in the craft of narrative and that also represents a vital decision you as a writer must make: Where should your narrative begin?

The simple distinction: A story is a series of events recorded in their chronological order. A plot is a series of events deliberately arranged so as to reveal their dramatic, thematic, and emotional significance. A story gives us only “what happened next,” whereas plot’s concern is what, how, and why, with scenes ordered to highlight the workings of cause and effect.

Here, for example, is a fairly standard story: A sober, industrious, and rather dull young man meets the woman of his dreams. She is beautiful, brilliant, passionate, and compassionate; more wonderful still, she loves him. They plan to marry, and on the eve of their wedding his friends give him a stag party, in the course of which they tease him, ply him with liquor, and drag him off to a whorehouse for a last fling. There he stumbles into a cubicle . . . to find himself facing his bride-to-be.

Where does this story become interesting? Where does the plot begin?

You may start, if you like, with the young man’s Mayflower ancestry. But if you do, we’ll struggle to figure out what the story is about, and we’re likely to close the book about the middle of the nineteenth century. You may begin with the first time he meets the extraordinary woman, but even then you must cover at least weeks, probably months, in a few pages; and that means you must summarize, skip, and generalize, and you’ll have a hard time both maintaining your credibility and holding our attention. Begin at the stag party? Better. If you do so, you will somehow have to let us know all that has gone before, either through dialogue or through the young man’s memory, but you have only one evening of action to cover, and we’ll get to the conflict quickly. Suppose you begin instead the next morning, when the man awakes with a hangover, in bed in a brothel with his bride on his wedding day. Is that, perhaps, the best of all? An immediate conflict that must lead to a quick and striking crisis?

E. M. Forster distinguishes between plot and story by describing story as


the chopped-off length of the tapeworm of time . . . a narrative of events arranged in their time sequence. A plot is also a narrative of events, the emphasis falling on causality. “The king died, and then the queen died,” is a story. “The king died, and then the queen died of grief,” is a plot. The time-sequence is preserved, but the sense of causality overshadows it. Or again: “The queen died, no one knew why, until it was discovered that it was through grief at the death of the king.” This is a plot with a mystery in it, a form capable of high development. It suspends the time sequence, it moves as far away from the story as its limitations will allow. Consider the death of the queen. If it is in a story we say, “and then?” If it is in a plot we ask, “why?”





The human desire to know why is as powerful as the desire to know what happened next, and it is a desire of a higher order. Once we have the facts, we inevitably look for the links between them, and only when we find such links are we satisfied that we “understand.” Rote memorization in a science class bores almost everyone. Grasp and a sense of discovery begin only when we perceive why “a body in motion tends to remain in motion” and what an immense effect this actuality has on the phenomena of our lives.

The same is true of the events of a story. Random incidents neither move nor illuminate; we want to know why one thing leads to another and to feel the inevitability of cause and effect, even if one of the causes is chance.

Here is a series of uninteresting events chronologically arranged.



Ariadne had a bad dream.

She woke up tired and cross.

She ate breakfast

She headed for class.

She saw Leroy.

She fell on the steps and broke her ankle.

Leroy offered to take notes for her.

She went to a hospital.



This series of events does not constitute a plot, and if you wish to fashion it into a plot, you can do so only by letting us know the meaningful relations among the events. We first assume that Ariadne woke in a temper because of her bad dream, and that Leroy offered to take notes for her because she’d broken her ankle. But why did she fall? Perhaps because she saw Leroy? Does that suggest that her bad dream was about him? Was she, then, thinking about his dream-rejection as she broke her egg irritably on the edge of the frying pan? What is the effect of his offer? Is it a triumph or just another polite form of rejection when, really, he could have missed class once to drive her to the x-ray lab? The emotional and dramatic significance of these ordinary events emerges in the relation of cause to effect, and where such relation can be shown, a possible plot comes into existence. Notice also that in this brief attempt to form the events into a plot, I have introduced both conflict and a pattern of connection/disconnection.

Ariadne’s is a story you might very well choose to tell chronologically: it needs to cover only an hour or two, and that much can be handled in the compressed form of the short story. But such a choice of plot is not inevitable even in this short compass. Might it be more gripping to begin with the wince of pain as she stumbles? Leroy comes to help her up and the yolk yellow of his T-shirt fills her field of vision. In the shock of pain she is immediately back in her dream . . .

When “nothing happens” in a story, it is because we fail to sense the causal relation between what happens first and what happens next. When something does “happen,” it is because the resolution of a short story or a novel describes a change in the character’s life, an effect of the events that have gone before. This is why Aristotle insisted with such apparent simplicity on “a beginning, a middle, and an end.” A story is capable of many meanings, and it is first of all in the choice of structure—which portion of the story forms the plot—that you offer us the gratifying sense that we “understand.”



THE SHORT STORY AND THE NOVEL

Many editors and writers insist that the short story and the novel are vastly different creatures. It is my belief, however, that, like the distinction between story and plot, the distinction between the two forms is very simple, and that many and profound possibilities of difference proceed from that simple source: a short story is short, and a novel is long.

Because of this, a short story can waste no words. It usually features the perspective of one or a very few characters. It may recount only one central action and one major change in the life of the central character or characters. It can afford no digression that does not directly affect the action. A short story strives to create what Edgar Allan Poe called “the single effect”—a single emotional impact that imparts a flash of understanding, though both impact and understanding may be complex. The virtue of a short story is its density, for it raises a single “what if” question, while a novel may raise many. If it is tight, sharp, economic, well-knit, and charged, then it is a good short story because it has exploited a central attribute of the form—that it is short.

All of these qualities remain praiseworthy in a novel, but a novel may also be comprehensive, vast, and panoramic. It may have power not because of its economy but because of its scope, breadth, and sweep—the virtues of a medium that is long. A novel may range through many consciousnesses, cover many years or generations, and travel the world. It may deal with a central line of action and one or several subplots. Many characters may change, many and various effects may constitute our final understanding. Many digressions may be tolerated and will not destroy the balance of the whole as long as they lead finally to some nuance of that understanding.

Occasionally in workshops, a new writer struggling to craft the shape of conflict-crisis-resolution may wonder if a story’s lack of one of these elements means the work “must be a novel.” Tempting as this hope may be, it usually only sidesteps the inevitable challenge of plotting, for not only must a novel have a large-scale plot structure, but individual chapters or episodes frequently are shaped around a pattern of conflict-crisis-incremental change that impels the novel onward.

Further, while no literary form is superior to another, few novelists achieve publication without first having crafted any number of short stories. The greater the limitation of space, the greater the necessity for pace, sharpness, and density. Short stories ask the writer to rise to the challenges of shaping, “showing,” and making significance again and again, experiences that may save that writer countless hours and pages when the time to tackle a novel comes along.

The form of the novel is an expanded story form. It asks for a conflict, a crisis, and a resolution, and no technique described in this book is irrelevant to its effectiveness.

Nor is the short story to be considered slight in a culture as rushed and at the same time sophisticated as our own. The twenty-first-century attention span may be curtailed, but it is trained in implication and inference. There is a consequent resurgence of interest in the short story form that is manifest in podcasts, blogs, and online magazines, and also in adaptations of fiction, both short and episodic, for the small screen. Live storytelling has found new blood and regular attendees on campuses and among the theaters of the larger cities. As early as the “radios” of Jerome Stern and others in the 1970s and ’80s, radio broadcasting began reopening to the form and now finds a full audience in such productions as This American Life. There may be a feedback loop from writing programs to publishing to writers, such that more story collections are published than heretofore and the “novel in stories” has become an admired framework. There are also increasing numbers of writers, like Raymond Carver and Alice Munro before them, who find the short story most in tune with their gifts and do not find it necessary to move to the longer form.

You are going to love some of your characters, because they are you or some facet of you, and you are going to hate some of your characters for the same reason. But no matter what, you are probably going to have to let bad things happen to some of the characters you love or you won’t have much of a story.



—Anne Lamott





TYPES OF FICTION

While it’s true that all stories need characters, a plot, a setting, and a particular point of view, it’s also true that different types of fiction emphasize some of these elements more than others—and conceive of them in their own particular ways.

Readers of genre fiction have very specific expectations when it comes to plot, characters, setting, and theme, and each genre has its own conventions and rules. Literary fiction differs from genre fiction fundamentally in the fact that the former is character-driven, the latter plot-driven. There is a strong tendency in genre fiction—though not a binding rule—to imply that life is fair and to let the hero or heroine, after great struggle, win out in the end; and a complementary tendency in literary fiction to posit that life is not fair, that triumph is partial and happiness tentative, that human existence is full of ambiguities, and that the hero and heroine are subject to mortality. Literary fiction also strives to reveal its meaning through the creation of unexpected or unusual characters, through patterns of action and turns of event that will surprise the reader, and through illuminating use of language.

Readers of the romance genre, which has its roots in the fiction of the Bronte sisters, will expect a plucky-but-down-on-her-luck heroine, a handsome and mysterious hero with some dark secret (usually a woman) in his background, a large house, a woods (through which the heroine will at some point flee in scanty clothing), and an eventual happy ending with the heroine in the hero’s arms.

Other genres have likewise developed from kinds of fiction that were once mainstream and represented major social problems or concerns. Early romance dealt with the serious question of how a woman was to satisfy the need for both stability and love in married life, how to be both independent and secure in a society with rigid sexual rules. The detective story evolved alongside widespread and intense interest in science, and an optimistic expectation that violence and mystery could be rationally explained. The western dealt with the ambivalence large numbers of westward-traveling Euro-Americans felt about the civilizing of the wilderness, the desire to rid the west of its brutality, and the fear that “taming” it would also destroy its promise of solitude.

Science fiction, the most recently developed and still developing genre, similarly deals with ambivalence about technology, the near-miraculous accomplishments of the human race through science, and the dangers to human feeling, soul, and environment. The surge in popularity of fantasy fiction can probably be attributed to nostalgia for a time unfettered by technological accomplishment and threat, since much fantasy employs a medieval setting and solves problems through magic, whereas science fiction is generally set in the future and solves problems through intelligence and technology. It is relevant that science fiction usually deals with some problem that can be seen to have a counterpart in contemporary culture (space travel, interplanetary intrigue, artificial intelligence, mechanical replacement of body parts, genetic manipulation), whereas the plots of fantasies tend to deal with obsolete or archaic traumas (wicked overlords, demon interlopers, and so forth).

Similarly, the renewed popularity of the vampire genre probably reflects a concern with bullying and the rejection of the Other, and of horror with either those problems or, in the case of the “walking dead,” with the possibility of human annihilation.

In any case, the many other genres, including but not confined to adventure, spy, and thriller, each have their own set of conventions regarding character, language, and events. Note again that the very naming of these kinds of fiction implies a narrowing, and an appeal to a particular range of interest.

Young adult, or YA fiction, and its middle-grade subset, are not really genres but a marketing tool of publishers capitalizing on the success of series like Cressida Cowell’s How to Train Your Dragon and J. K. Rowling’s Harry Potter—and hoping to foster the reading habit in technologically inclined generations. YA books have always been written but not called that: Huckleberry Finn by Mark Twain, Alice in Wonderland by Lewis Carroll, A Wrinkle in Time by Madeleine L’Engle, The Chronicles of Narnia by C. S. Lewis, to name but a few classics.

Many teachers of fiction writing do not accept manuscripts in genre, believing that, whereas writing literary fiction can teach you how to write good genre fiction, writing genre fiction does not teach you how to write good literary fiction—does not, in effect, teach you “how to write,” by which I mean how to be original and meaningful in words.

Others take a different stance, telling students who want to write stories containing vampires or Vulcans to go ahead, bearing in mind that they are not immune from reader expectations about what makes a good story—character development, credible plot, vivid setting and details, nuanced theme, and so forth.

Realism—the attempt to render an authentic picture of life, in such a way that the reader identifies with one or more characters—is a fair starting point for the pursuit of literary fiction. The writer’s attempt at verisimilitude is comparable to the scientific method of observation and verification. Realism is also a convention, and not the only way to begin to write, but like the drawing of still life in the study of painting, it can impart skills that will be useful in more sophisticated efforts whether they are realistic or not.

In any case, the tendency of recent literature is to move away from rigid categories, toward a loosening or crossing of story types—so-called genre-busting or genre-bending, in which genre fiction presses at the bounds of literary fiction. Many writers are eager to experiment with pieces that blur the distinctions, approaching genre fiction with literary ambition and intent. There are literary spy novels from John Le Carré and literary fairy tales from Angela Carter and Robert Coover. There is literary science fiction from Philip K. Dick, Ursula K. Le Guin, Doris Lessing, Margaret Atwood, Lauren Beukes, James Smythe, and Aliette de Bodard. Dan Choan writes literary horror stories; Kate Atkinson and Michael Chabon, detective fiction (Chabon even a Sherlock Holmes novel); Justin Cronin, vampire stories. It’s worth taking a look, as an example of such genre-bending, at Tobias Wolff’s “Bullet in the Brain,” which adopts the setup of a bank heist tale and then bends it into a story about loss and language. There are also myriad examples of hybrid fiction, where fiction incorporates other media or genres—photography, poetry, drama, memoir. Adam Thorpe’s novel Ulverton ends in a screen play. Jennifer Egan’s novel A Visit from the Goon Squad contains a chapter in Power Point. Hypertext fiction is a genre of literary fiction that is interactive and nonlinear.

Magic realism uses the techniques and devices of realism—verisimilitude, ordinary lives and settings, familiar psychology—and introduces events of an impossible or fantastic nature, never leaving the tone and techniques of realism. Whereas fantasy attempts to bedazzle its readers with the amazing quality of the magic, magic realism works in the opposite direction, to convince the reader that the extraordinary occurs in the context and the guise of the ordinary. Gabriel García Márquez is considered the master of magic realism and his 100 Years of Solitude its apotheosis. In Donald Barthelme’s novel The Dead Father, children travel with the literal burden of the not-dead-enough dead father. Karen Russell’s St. Lucy’s Home for Girls Raised by Wolves matter-of-factly brings these wolf-parented girls to a boarding school. In Brenna Gomez’s “Corzo,” a seventh-grade girl calmly though bloodily reaches in and removes her father’s heart.

Experimental fiction is difficult to define, because by definition the experimental is the thing that nobody expects or predicts. There are, however, a number of kinds of experiment that have come to be recognized as subsets of literary fiction. Metafiction, for example, takes as its subject matter the writing of fiction, calls attention to its own techniques, and insists that what is happening is that a story is being written and read. Often, the writing of the story is taken as a metaphor for some other human struggle or endeavor, as in the stories of John Barth.

Minimalism (also called miniaturism) refers to a flat, spare, and subdued style of writing, characterized by an accumulation of (sometimes apparently random) detail that gives an impression of benumbed emotion. The point of view tends to be objective or near-objective, the events reported without interpretation and accumulating toward a tense, disturbing—and inconclusive—conclusion. Raymond Carver is the primary example of a minimalist writer.

The short-short story is a story under 2,000 words. Microfiction and flash fiction are terms used for stories under 250 words. Such pieces, according to Nancy Huddleston Packer, “push to the limits the basic elements of all short stories—compression, suggestion, and change . . . these stories are so compressed, they explode.” Microfiction is also sometimes called hybrid fiction because it is often difficult to tell, in this short compass, the distinction between a story and a poem. Many hundreds of authors write in this form; Lydia Davis is among the best known.



SUGGESTED STORIES



“Happy Endings”

Margaret Atwood





“Silver Water”

Amy Bloom





“We Didn’t”

Stuart Dybek





“Corzo”

Brenna Gomez





“How Far She Went”

Mary Hood





“Everything That Rises Must Converge”

Flannery O’Connor





“Binocular Vision”

Edith Pearlman





“The Second Tree from the Corner”

E. B. White





“The Use of Force”

William Carlos Williams





“Bullet in the Brain”

Tobias Wolff





WRITING PROMPTS



1. Write a scene placing two characters in this fundamental conflict: one wants something that the other does not want to give. Let the conflict escalate. Who uses what tactics to get her/his way? Who wins?

2. A slightly more complicated variation on the same theme: one has half of something that is no good without the other half; each wants the other’s half. Do they connect or disconnect?

3. Write a scene between two characters in conflict over a trivial object or issue. Let us know that the real tension is about something more significant (e.g., not control of the remote, but about control and being remote).

4. Place a character in conflict with some aspect of nature; it may be as small as a mosquito or as big as an avalanche. Balance the forces so that the reader doesn’t know who will “win” until the crisis action.

5. Write a story, no longer than three pages, in which the protagonist does not get what she or he wants, but which nevertheless ends happily.

6. Pick a scene or setup of genre fiction (fantasy kingdom, western bar, discovery of the body, or other familiar story form) and write a scene in which the real action is in the character’s mind.

7. Write a short story on a postcard. Send it. Notice that if you’re going to manage a conflict, crisis, and resolution in this microfiction space, you’ll have to introduce conflict immediately.





