9 PLAY IT AGAIN, SAM: Revision and Theme

9: Play It Again, Sam



REVISION AND THEME



Re-Vision

Worry It and Walk Away

Criticism and the Workshop

Revision Questions

Theme

Asking the Big Question: What Have I Written?

How Fictional Elements Contribute to Theme

A Revision Narrative

A Last Word

“Talent is a long patience,” Anton Chekhov said, an acknowledgment that the creative process is not all inventive and extends far beyond the first heated rush. Corrective, critical, nutritive, and fostering, revision is a matter of rendering a story the best that it can be. William C. Knott, in The Craft of Fiction, cogently observes that “anyone can write; only the writers can rewrite. Here is where the job gets done, where the crucial struggle is fought. And no one can do it for you.”



RE-VISION

Revising is a process more dreaded than dreadful. The resistance to rewriting is, if anything, greater than the resistance to beginning in the first place. Yet chances are that once you have committed yourself to a first draft, you’ll be unable to leave it in an unfinished and unsatisfying state. You’ll be unhappy until it’s right. Making it right will involve a second commitment, to seeing the story fresh and creating it again with the advantage of “re-vision.” All the methods of shaping, enriching, and enlivening fiction discussed throughout this book implicitly concern this revision. Alice Munro, in the introduction to her Selected Stories, describes the risk, the readiness, and the reward. It is, she says, precisely when you think it is finished that


the story is in the greatest danger of losing its life. . . . It does what I intended, but it turns out that my intention was all wrong. . . . I go around glum and preoccupied, trying to think of ways to fix the problem. Usually the right way pops up in the middle of this.





A big relief, then. Renewed energy. Resurrection.





Except that it isn’t the right way. Maybe a way to the right way. Now I write pages and pages I’ll have to discard. . . . Out they go. But by this time I’m on the track. . . . I just have to keep trying till I find the best way of getting there.





Everything that needs to be said has already been said. But since no one was listening, everything must be said again.



—André Gide



To find the best way of getting there, you may have to “see again” more than once. The process of revision involves external and internal insight. You’ll need your conscious critic, your creative instinct, and readers you trust. You may need each of them several times, not necessarily in that order. A story gets better not just by polishing and refurbishing, not just by improving a word choice here and an image there, but by taking risks with the structure, re-envisioning, being open to new meaning itself. Annie Dillard uses the metaphor of knocking out “a bearing wall” for the revising writer’s sacrifice of the very aspect of the story that inspired its writing. Extreme as it sounds, this is an experience familiar to many accomplished writers:


The part you must jettison is not only the best-written part; it is also, oddly, that part which was to have been the very point. It is the original key passage, the passage on which the rest was to hang, and from which you yourself drew the courage to begin.





—Annie Dillard, The Writing Life




Worry It and Walk Away

To write your first draft, you banished the internal critic. Now make the critic welcome. Revision is work, but you may find you can concentrate on the work for much longer than you could play at freedrafting. It has occurred to me that writing a first draft is very like tennis or softball—I have to be psyched for it. Energy level up, alert, on my toes. A few hours is all I can manage, and at the end of it I’m wiped out. Revision is like careful carpentry, and if I’m under a deadline or just determined to get this thing crafted and polished, I can be good for twelve hours of it.

It doesn’t have to be calm and clear-eyed. You just have to not give up.



—David Mamet



The first round of rewrites is probably a matter of letting your misgivings surface. Focus for a while on what seems awkward, overlong, undeveloped, flat, or flowery. Tinker. Tighten. Sharpen. More important at this stage than finishing any given page or phrase is getting to know your story in order to open it to new possibilities. You will also get tired of it; you may feel stuck.

Then put it away. Don’t look at it for a matter of days or weeks—until you feel fresh on the project. In addition to getting some distance on your story, you’re mailing it to your unconscious, not deliberately working out the flaws but temporarily letting them go. Rollo May, in The Courage to Create, describes what frequently happens next:


Everyone uses from time to time such expressions as, “a thought pops up,” an idea comes “from the blue” or “dawns” or “comes as though out of a dream,” or “it suddenly hit me.” These are various ways of describing a common experience: the breakthrough of ideas from some depth below the level of awareness.





It is my experience that such realizations occur over and over again in the course of writing a short story or novel. Often I will believe that because I know who my characters are and what happens to them, I know what my story is about—and often I find I’m wrong, or that my understanding is shallow or incomplete.

In the first draft of my novel Cutting Stone, for instance, I opened with the sentence, “It took a hundred and twelve bottles of champagne to see the young Poindexters off to Arizona.” A page later one character whispered to another that young Mr. Poindexter had “consumption.” I worked on this book for a year (taking my characters off to Arizona where they dealt with the desert heat, thirst, alcoholism, loss of religion, and the development of mining interests and the building trade) before I saw the connection between “consumption” and “champagne.” When I understood that simple link, I understood the overarching theme—surely latent in the idea from the moment it had taken hold of me—between tuberculosis, spiritual thirst, consumerism, and addiction, all issues of “consumption.”

When you are despairing, walk away from your work. Take out a blank sheet of paper and write down three things that have already happened that day for which you are grateful. Remember how luminous you are; reflect on all the people who believe in you. Then get back to work.



—Frances Ya-Chu Cowhig



It might seem dismaying that you should see what your story is about only after you have written it. But try it; you’ll like it. Nothing is more exhilarating than the discovery that a complex pattern has lain in your mind ready to unfold.

In the early stages of revision, both the worrying and the walking away are necessary. Perhaps it is bafflement itself that plunges us into the unconscious space where the answer lies.


Criticism and the Workshop

Once you have thought your story through, drafted it, and worked on it to the best of your ability, someone else’s eyes can help to refresh the vision of your own. The trick to making good use of criticism is to be utterly selfish about it. Be greedy for it. Take it all in. Ultimately you are the laborer, the arbiter, and the boss in any dispute about your story, so you can afford to consider any problem and any solution. Most of us feel not only committed to what we have put on the page but defensive on its behalf—wanting, really, to be told only that it is a work of genius or, failing that, to find out that we have gotten away with it. Therefore, the first exigency of revision is that you learn to hear, absorb, and accept criticism.

“Revising is like cutting your own hair,” says novelist Robert Stone: while you may sense the need for improvement, it’s hard to get right what you can never entirely see for yourself. This is the major advantage of a workshop—your fellow writers may not be able to tell you how to style the material in the way that best suits the story, but they can at least hold up the mirror and also offer a more distanced perspective. Wise professionals rely on the help of an agent or editor at this juncture (although even the wisest still smart at censure), and most count on regular feedback from other writers in regular meetings. So if a workshop is not available to you, start your own. You can always ask other writers, put a notice in the local paper or on social media. Meeting face to face is always best, but online groups can also flourish.

How to assimilate so many opinions, let alone choose what is useful? First, give special consideration to the comments of those two or three workshop members with whose responses you have generally agreed before. However, the best criticism—or at any rate the most useful—simply points out what you had already sensed for yourself but had hoped to get away with. As Flannery O’Connor put it, with typical bluntness, in fiction “you can do anything you can get away with, but nobody has ever gotten away with much.”

It used to be popular to speak of “constructive criticism” and “destructive criticism,” but these are misleading terms suggesting that positive remarks are useful and negative criticism useless. In practice the opposite is usually the case. You’re likely to find that the most constructive thing a reader can do is say I don’t believe this, I don’t follow this, I don’t understand this, pointing to precisely the passages that made you uneasy. This kind of laying-the-finger-on-the-trouble-spot produces an inward groan, but it’s also satisfying; you know just where to go to work. Often the most destructive thing a reader can do is offer you a positive suggestion—Why don’t you have him crash the car?—that is irrelevant to your vision of the story. Be suspicious of praise that is too extravagant, of blame that is too general. If your impulse is to defend the story or yourself, still the impulse. Behave as if bad advice were good advice, and give it serious consideration. You can reject it after you have explored it for anything of use it may offer.

Workshop members often voice sharply divided responses to a manuscript, a situation that may confuse and frustrate the author. Algonquin Books editor Duncan Murrell advises that workshop writers


pay close attention to the parts of their work that make readers stumble, but disregard most of the solutions those readers suggest. . . . Good readers have a gut level understanding that something’s wrong in a story, but they’re often unclear about what it is, or what to do about it. Yet once pointed to the weak sections, authors almost always come up with better solutions than anything a reader or an editor can offer. . . . The trick is to bite your lip when readers tell you how to fix your story, while noting the passages that need repair.





Indeed, while the author may or may not benefit from peer critique, everyone else in the workshop does, for the practice of thinking through and articulating responses to a story’s challenges eventually makes all participants more objective critics of their own work. You will notice that the more specific the criticism you offer—or receive—the more useful it proves and the less it stings; similarly, the more specific the praise of “what works,” the more likely it is to reinforce good habits—and to be believed. After several months with the experience of the workshop, you’ll find that you can critique a story within your own imagination, knowing who would say what, with whom you would agree, and what you already know to be true.

Art is not difficult because it wishes to be difficult, but because it wishes to be art.



—Donald Barthelme



Within a day or two of the workshop, novelist-playwright Michelle Carter advises, the author should try to “re-hear criticism,” that is, to assess what it is readers are responding to, which may not be apparent from the suggested “fix.” For example, if a number of readers suggest changing the story’s point of view from third person to first, Carter might reinterpret that to mean that the narrator seems too remote from the characters—not that first-person narration is literally a better choice, but that readers want a more immediate experience of the main character’s emotional dilemma.

Similarly, if readers want “to know more about Character X,” the best response is not necessarily to sprinkle in more facts and backstory. What they actually want may be a greater understanding of the character’s motivations or a closer rendering of crucial moments.

Be tough with yourself, Carter urges, even when you realize that criticism is based on a misreading. Rarely is misinterpretation solely the mistake of the reader: ask what awkwardness of writing or false emphasis might have led to that skewed reading. Novelist Wally Lamb reinforces this point:


Often I think we let the writer get away with too much. If the writing is unclear, we’ll read it a second time and make it clear to ourselves and then let the writer off the hook, when, in fact, the writing has to stand for itself. . . . You want to work on the writing until it is good enough that the writer doesn’t have to be in the room explaining and interpreting.





Kenneth Atchity, in A Writer’s Time, advises compulsory “vacations” at crucial points in the revising process, in order to let the criticism cook until you feel ready, or impatient, to get back to writing. So once again, walk away, and when you feel that you have acquired enough distance from the criticism and the story to see it anew, go back to work. Make notes of your plans, large and small. Talk to yourself in your journal about what you want to accomplish and where you think you have failed. Let your imagination play with new images or passages of dialogue. Always keep a hard or digital copy of each draft so that you can go back to it if you later want to—and then be ruthless rewriting the next. Eudora Welty advised cutting apart printed pages and pinning them back together so that they can be easily rearranged. I like to use the whole surface of the kitchen table as a cut-and-tape board before I cut-and-paste on the computer. Some people can keep the story in their heads and do their rearranging directly on the screen—which in any case has made the putting-back-together process a mechanical matter.


Revision Questions

As you plan the revision and as you rewrite, you will know (and your critics will tell you) what problems are unique to your story. There are also general, almost universal, pitfalls that you can avoid if you ask yourself the following questions:

Why should the reader turn from the first page to the second? Does the first sentence, paragraph, page introduce real tension? If it doesn’t, you have probably begun at the wrong place. If you can’t find a way to introduce tension on the first page, you may have to question whether you have a story after all.

Is there unnecessary summary? It is a common impulse to try to cover too much ground. Cut down on summary and unnecessary flashback. These dissipate energy and lead you to tell rather than show. How much necessary information can be conveyed through dialogue, dress or gesture, a brief thought?

Is it original? Almost every writer thinks first, in some way or other, of the familiar, the usual, the given. This character is a stereotype, that emotion is too easy, that phrase is a cliché. First-draft mistakes are inevitable, but letting the inert choice stand is a way of being dishonest. A good writer will comb the work for clichés and labor to find the exact, the honest, and the fresh.

Is it clear? Although ambiguity and mystery provide some of our most profound pleasures in literature, beginning writers are often unable to distinguish between mystery and muddle, ambiguity and sloppiness. You may want your character to be rich with contradiction, but we need to be oriented on the simplest level of reality before we can share your imaginative world. Where are we? When are we? Who are they? How do things look? What time of day or night is it? What’s the weather? What’s happening?

Is it self-conscious? Probably the most famous piece of advice to the rewriter is William Faulkner’s “kill all your darlings.” When you are carried away with the purple of your prose, the music of your alliteration, the hilarity of your wit, the profundity of your insights, chances are that you are having a better time writing than the reader will have reading. No reader will forgive you, and no reader should. Just tell the story. The style will follow of itself if you just tell the story.

Where is it too long? Most of us, and even the best of us, write too long. We are so anxious to explain every nuance, cover every possible aspect of character, action, and setting that we forget the necessity of stringent selection. In fiction, and especially in the short story, we want sharpness, economy, and vivid, telling detail. More than necessary is too much. I have been helped in my own tendency to tell all by a friend who went through a copy of one of my novels, drawing a line through the last sentence of about every third paragraph. Then in the margin he wrote, again and again, “Hit it and get out.” That’s good advice for anyone.

Are there too many scenes? Many novice writers, especially if a story is developed from a real experience, are tempted to give each turn of plot or change of setting a new scene when several could be fused to better effect. One night they’re tender and the next they quarrel? Could the spat come right after the cuddle, and raise either the comedy or the tension level, or both? This is hard but sound advice: Tell your story in the fewest possible scenes. It may seem impossible to cut or fuse, but often there’s a way if you give it enough thought.

Is the language fresh? Is there a way to sharpen the imagery, the dialogue, the setting? Are the characters alive? Could they be a little brighter, darker, more intense, more present to us?

Where is the story undeveloped in character, action, imagery, theme? In any first, second, or third draft of a manuscript there are likely to be necessary passages sketched, skipped, or skeletal. What information is missing, what actions incomplete, what motives obscure, what images inexact? Where does the action occur so abruptly that it loses its emotional force? Is the crisis presented as a scene?

The better I get, the harder it is.



—Christopher Coake



Where is it too general? Originality, economy, and clarity can all be achieved through the judicious use of significant detail. Learn to spot general, vague, and fuzzy terms. Be suspicious of yourself anytime you see nouns like someone or everything, adjectives like huge or handsome, adverbs like very or really. Seek instead a particular thing, a particular size, an exact degree.

Although the dread of “starting over” is a real and understandable one, chances are that the rewards of revising will startlingly outweigh the pains. Sometimes a character who is dead on the page will come to life through the addition of a few lines of dialogue or the re-seeing of details. Sometimes a turgid or tedious paragraph can become sharp with a few judicious cuts. Sometimes dropping page one and putting page seven where page three used to be can provide a skeleton to an otherwise limp story. And sometimes, often, perhaps always, the difference between an amateur rough cut and a publishable story is in the struggle at the rewriting stage.

Here are a couple of devices to try. If you’ve been writing your story on a computer, retype at least one full draft, making both planned and spontaneous changes as you go. The computer’s abilities can tempt us to take a “fix-it” approach to revision, but jumping in and out of the text to correct problems can result in a revision that reads like patchwork. Rather, the effect of even small changes should ripple through the story, and this is more likely to happen if the writer reenters the story as a whole by literally rewriting it from start to finish.

Write two or three revisions of a story draft, focusing on a different issue each time. You might zero in on the motivations of a character whose behavior and dialogue don’t yet ring true; or you might simply focus on using setting to reflect emotion or threading physical activity through dialogue scenes. Focusing on a single goal lets you concentrate your efforts—yet other developments will naturally occur in response to the single-focus changes.

In an interview in Conversations on Writing Fiction, novelist and teacher Jane Smiley says she asks her student writers to confront their own sets of “evasions,” the counterproductive “rituals which don’t actually allow them to spend time with or become engaged with their chosen themes or characters.” For example, many people find conflict hard to handle in real life and therefore avoid it, often for good reason. Yet many of us sidestep conflict in our fiction too, even knowing its necessity in driving a character toward a defining crisis. If this sounds like an evasion you’ve experienced, take a look back at places in the story where explosive scenes should happen—places where characters ought to confront or defend. Are these, in fact, all-out scenes? Or do your characters neatly sidestep the conflict and retreat to their private thoughts? Does another character too conveniently knock at the door?

Taking refuge in the making of metaphors, however vivid, rather than clearly depicting what is, may be another form of evasion, perhaps reflecting a writer’s lack of confidence in the interest of his or her material.

Spiraling off into the weird and random may reflect a similar lack of confidence or indecision; overly clever, bantering dialogue that strains to entertain may reflect a desire to dazzle, while avoiding the harder search for the voice and speech that is both realistic and revealing of character.

Evasions may be easier to observe in others’ work at first, so you might want to ask a trusted friend or workshop mate to help you recognize the evasions in your own stories. As you revise and encounter points of resistance—those places you hesitate to go further or become more specific—ask yourself, Is this right for the story or is it simply my comfortable habit?



THEME

Asking the Big Question: What Have I Written?

How does a fiction mean?

Imaginative writing is ultimately a hybrid creature, one part wanting wild flight, the other thrilling to the harness. In a piece of literary criticism, your goal is to say as clearly and directly as possible what you mean. In fiction, your goal is to make people and make them do things and, ideally, never to “say what you mean” at all. Theoretically, an outline can never harm a paper for a literature class: this is what I have to say, and I’ll say it through points A, B, and C. But if a writer sets out to write a story to illustrate an idea, the fiction will almost inevitably be thin. Even if you begin with an outline, as many writers do, it will be an outline of the action and not of your “points.” You may not know the meaning of the story until the characters begin to tell you what it is. You’ll begin with an image of a person or a situation that seems vaguely to embody something important, and you’ll learn as you go what that something is. Likewise, what you mean will emerge in the reading experience and take place in the reader’s mind, “not,” as the narrator says of Marlow’s tales in Heart of Darkness, “inside like a kernel but outside, enveloping the tale which brought it out.”

A good novel begins with a small question and ends with a bigger one.



—Paula Fox



But early or late in the revision process, you may find yourself impelled by, under pressure of, or interested primarily in your theme. It will seem that you have set yourself this lonely, austere, and tortuous task because you do have something to say. At this point you will, and you should, begin to let the sorting-comparing-cataloging neocortex of your brain go to work on the stuff of your story. Rather than “putting in a theme,” you’ll be looking back to see what you’ve already, mostly subconsciously, been doing all along. John Gardner describes the process in The Art of Fiction.


Theme, it should be noticed, is not imposed on the story but evoked from within it—initially an intuitive but finally an intellectual act on the part of the writer. The writer muses on the story idea to determine what it is in it that has attracted him, why it seems to him worth telling. Having determined . . . what interests him—and what chiefly concerns the major character . . . he toys with various ways of telling his story, thinks about what has been said before about [his theme], broods on every image that occurs to him, turning it over and over, puzzling it, hunting for connections, trying to figure out—before he writes, while he writes, and in the process of repeated revisions—what it is he really thinks. . . . Only when he thinks about a story in this way does he achieve not just an alternative reality or, loosely, an imitation of nature, but true, firm art—fiction as serious thought.





So, theme is what your story is about. But that is not enough, because a story may be “about” a dying samurai or a quarreling couple or two kids on a trampoline, and those would not be the themes of those stories. A story is also “about” an abstraction, and if the story is significant, that abstraction may be very large; yet thousands of stories are about love, other thousands about death, and still other thousands about both love and death, and to say this is to say little about the theme of any of them.

We might better understand theme if we ask questions like What does this story say about what it’s about? What does it tell us about the idea or abstraction that seems to be contained in it? What attitudes or judgments does it imply? Above all, how do the elements of fiction contribute to our experience of those ideas and attitudes in the story?


How Fictional Elements Contribute to Theme

Whatever the idea and attitudes that underlie the theme of a story, that story will bring them into the realm of experience through its particular and unique pattern. Theme involves emotion, logic, and judgment, all three—but the pattern that forms the particular experience of that theme is made up of every element of fiction this book has discussed: the arrangement, shape, and flow of the action, as performed by the characters, realized in their details, seen in their atmosphere, from a unique point of view, through the imagery and the rhythm of the language.

The process of discovering the theme of your story, worrying the story until its theme reveals itself, connections occur, images recur, a pattern emerges—is more conscious than readers know, beginning writers want to accept, or established writers are willing to admit. It has become a popular—cliché—stance for writers to claim that they haven’t the faintest idea what they mean in their writing. Don’t ask me; read the book. If I knew what it meant, I wouldn’t have written it. It means what it says. When an author makes such a response, what it indicates is not that there are no themes, ideas, or meanings in the work but that these are not separable from the pattern of fictional experience in which they are embodied.

Some people say that you should write what you know, but I am driven to write what I learn.



—Abby Geni



But beginning critics also resist. Students irritated by the analysis of literature often ask, How do you know she did that on purpose? How do you know it didn’t just happen to come out that way? The answer is that you don’t. But what is on the page is on the page. An author, no less than a reader or critic, can see an emerging pattern, and the author has both the possibility and the obligation of manipulating it. When you have put something on the page, you have two possibilities, and only two: you may cut it or you are committed to it.


A Revision Narrative

Again, I can only illustrate this labor of revision and discovery from my own experience. As I write this, I am still in the process of revising a novel, Indian Dancer. The novel tells the story of a girl born in Belgium in 1930, who escapes to England during the Second World War and later emigrates to America. Most of the novel deals with her adolescent and adult life, but after I had written many of the later scenes, it seemed to me that the novel should begin with an image of that childhood escape, which affects everything she later does. I felt “inspired” when I woke up one morning and tapped out this:


Always,





she retained one image from the boat, too fleeting for a memory but too substantial for a dream, like a few frames clipped from a kinetoscope. She was standing in the stern, embraced from behind by a woman who was wrapping her in rough blanket stuff. Her shoes and the hem of her coat above her knees were wet. She knew that the woman was kind, but the smell of anxiety and too many nights’ sweat filled her with dark judgment. There was no moon at all, which was the point, but all the same she could watch the wake of the boat widening behind them. She also knew, in a cold, numbed way, that her father was bleeding on the shore, but what presented itself as monstrous was the wake, dark and glutinous, ever spreading toward the land, as if she herself were a speck being washed from a wound. I will never go back. I will never. This was experienced as grief, not yet a vow.





If you haven’t surprised yourself, you haven’t written.



—Eudora Welty



After a day or so I felt this was melodramatic—that “dark judgment,” her father “bleeding on the shore,” the “monstrous” and “glutinous” sea. I noticed that “kinetoscope” stuck out like a piece of show-off research. I thought there should be more sense of the woman trying to help her, and of the others on the boat. The past tense also troubled me. If she “always retained,” then wouldn’t the memory be in the present?


Always,





also, she is standing in the stern, embraced from behind by a woman who swaddles her in coarse blanket stuff. Her shoes and the hem of her coat above her knees are wet. There is no moon—which is the point—but all the same she can see the wake widening in the Channel, and close beside her on the deck the boy who broke his shin, the bone stub moving under the flesh like a tongue in a cheek. The man—his father?—still has the boy’s mouth stuffed with a forearm of loden coat to keep him from crying out, although they are far enough from shore that the oars have been shipped and the motor roped into life. It sputters like a heart. Behind her the people huddle—you can’t tell heroes from refugees—over flasks of tea and Calvados whose fireapple smell flings up on the smell of sea. She will never see any of these people again. The woman’s armpit cups her chin, old wet wool and fear. She knows unflinchingly that her father has been left behind. What presents itself as monstrous is the wake—dark, glutinous—which seems to be driving them from the land on its slubbed point as if the boat is a clot being washed from a wound.





I will never go back. I will never. This is experienced as grief, not yet a vow.





I fiddled with this a lot, still dissatisfied with its tone, which seemed to set the book on a loftier course than I intended, but it was several months before it struck me that the woman should tell this scene. I think it was the image of the boy’s broken bone “like a tongue in a cheek” that gave me the first hint of the woman’s voice. She was a British woman; I imagined her as working class, one of the accidental heroes of the Resistance, a practical, solid sort. This revelation must have occurred to me on an airplane (the disembodied feeling of airplanes always sets me writing) because I scribbled my notes on a page of a yellow pad (shown on page 216).

Now I started over, putting the scene back in chronological order but always chasing the woman’s voice, also reading up on the period and the events of the war, checking out British expressions with my son who lives in London.



Over the course of several months I kept coming back to this scene, trying to imagine it more fully, to heighten the sense of danger as the little boat flees the mines and U-boats, but to keep it in the chatty, down-to-earth voice of the woman who was—when? I asked myself suddenly; why?—telling this story—to whom? At some point, having spent perhaps a couple of full-time work weeks on this tiny but crucial scene, it came to me that the woman was being interviewed on television, for one of those anniversary documentaries of the war. At once, though I do not describe the scene of the interview, I could see and hear her more clearly.



The book now begins this way:


Transit: Ostend–Dover





All that spring and summer we brought back boatloads of the refugees. The Vicar organized us. They didn’t mind I was a woman because I was able-bodied. We travelled down from Teddington once a month to make the crossing, and we had the use of Duck Henley’s trawler and half a dozen meeting points along the Flemish coast. Underground runners all through Belgium setting up the rendezvous.





It’s a wonder what you remember. Great swollen blanks, and then some daft thing bobs up like flotsam. Such as, I’d never worn a pair of trousers, and what I couldn’t get used to was the twill going swish between my thighs. Is that camera running? Don’t show me saying thighs, will you? Anyway, that and the smells. Tar, old fish in the wet boards. Seasick, of course. And off your own skin a bit of metal smell, with a sourness like fireworks. When they say “sweating bullets” I expect that’s what they mean.





The ones we ferried came in every sort—rich man, poor man, tinker, tailor. I never saw a one of them again. Now and then I cross via Newhaven over to Normandy for the shopping, and I look around and think: they’re not so different, take away their pocket books and their sunburn. What struck me, in Teddington everybody got raw noses from the cold and spider veins from the fire, but those ones were always drained-looking like they hadn’t been out of doors, although most had been living rough or walking nights. You probably think I misremember it from a newsreel—not that we ever made it into the Movietone—but I said it at the time: every one of them gray, and eyes like drain holes that the color washed right down.





It’s the children stick in your mind—a wee tiddler with its eyes wide open and its mouth tight shut. I remember one boy landed crooked off the dock and broke his shin, so the bone stub rolled under the skin like a tongue in a cheek. Somebody gave him a mouthful of coat sleeve to keep him quiet.





It was that same trip we were expecting a father and daughter that didn’t show up, and we about pushed off without them. We’d heard dogs, and you never knew the meaning of dogs—it could be the patrols, or just somebody’s mutt in a furore. One thing I’ve never understood, you pick a night with no moon and a piece of shore without a light—a disused lighthouse this was, great dark lump in the dark—and you can’t see a whit, can not see. And then there’s a click, like, in the back of your eyes, and you can. Sandiford was pressing off the piling, and the Vicar said, no, steady on. Duck was reluctant—you couldn’t know when the boy would yell out—and then he felt it too and had them put up the oars. The waves were thick as black custard, and the black shore, and now, click! there’s this girl, maybe ten or twelve, gawky little tyke, slogging straight into the water up to her coat hem. Sandiford swung his arm signaling her to go round the dock and fetched her down with her shoes full of water. She’s got one hand done up in a fist against her collar bone. I wrapped her up, and she says po-faced, “My father arrives not. I arrive alone.” She says, “My fah-zer.” I knew better than to ask.





From there across—you understand, nobody said U-boats. Nobody said mines. Mostly you didn’t keep an eye out, except for Duck and Sandiford whose job it was, because you were superstitious you would call them up. All the same that’s what was in everybody’s mind. You just hoped the kiddies didn’t know the odds.





What I remember is, we had a little paraffin stove, and usually when you got out far enough to rope the motors into life, they were all glad to settle down over a cuppa. But this one didn’t leave the stern maybe eight hours of rough crossing, looking back where we’d come from in the dark. She held that one hand tight as lockjaw, and I thought she had some money in there, maybe, or a bit of jewelry, something she’d been told to keep from harm. You’d think you wouldn’t be curious under the circumstances, but eight hours is a long time to be standing, your mind must be doing something. I remember I tucked the blanket tighter around her and held it there, which she let me, and for most of the way we just stood till it was lightening a little down by the horizon. She dozed, I thought. She sagged against me and bit by bit her hand relaxed over the top of the blanket. There was nothing in it. Not a thing. I cupped it in my own and chafed it back to life a little. And I thought the way we must have looked to God, that greasy little trawler in the black wake, like a clot being washed from a wound.





My folder of drafts of this passage now runs to forty pages, excessive and obsessive perhaps, but it is after all the beginning of the book and must be right. I have noticed over the years that my digging at, fiddling with, scratching away at a scene will often turn up something much more fundamental than a new image or a livelier verb. In this case, I gradually realized that the reason the scene must be in somebody else’s voice is that the heroine does not remember it. Traumatized by her flight, she cannot recall witnessing her father’s death until she is nearly fifty years old. When I realized that, I understood much better what story I was telling and how the plot could be shaped and resolved. I had the delicious chance to let my heroine see the television documentary in the 1980s—in a twenty-year-old rerun—and let that chunk of interview, which contained the reader’s first view of her, finally jog her memory.

You can make a fresh start with your final breath.



—Bertolt Brecht




A Last Word

A child learns to draw one circle on top of another, to add two little triangles at the top and a curved line at the bottom, and from this particular pattern of marks emerges a creature of an altogether different nature: a cat! The child draws one square on top of another and connects the corners—and has made three dimensions where there are only two! And although these are simple tricks that can be taught and learned, they partake of the nature of creativity, in which several elements are joined to produce not merely a whole that is greater than the sum of its parts, but a whole that is something altogether other. The fusion of elements into a unified pattern is the nature of creativity—from the sprouting of an onion to the painting of Guernica. At the conception of a human fetus or a short story, there occurs the conjunction of two unlike things, cells or images, that have never been joined before. Around this conjunction other cells, other images and ideas accumulate in a deliberate pattern. That pattern is the unique being of the creature, and if the pattern does not cohere, it miscarries or is stillborn.

In the organic unity of a work of literature concrete image is not separate from character, which is revealed in dialogue and point of view, which may be illuminated by simile, which may reveal theme, which is contained in plot as water is contained in an apple. No one can tell you how to achieve this, nor if you achieve it will you be able to explain very clearly how you have done so. A good critic can show you where a metaphor does or does not illuminate character, where character does or does not ring true in an action. But the critic cannot tell you how to make the character breathe. You achieve that only through identifying what to cut and what to commit to, in the hope that you may arrive at an organic story, one that cannot be reduced to a theme but embodies one.

In the unified pattern of a fiction there is also something to which the name of “magic” may be given, where one empty word is placed upon another and tapped with a third, and a flaming scarf or a long-eared hope is pulled out of the tall black heart. The most magical thing about this magic is that once the trick is explained, it is not explained, and the better you understand how it works, the better it will work again.

Ideas are not new, but the form in which they are expressed is constantly renewed, and new forms give life to what used to be called the eternal verities. An innovative writer tries to forge, and those who follow try to perfect, forms that so fuse with meaning that form itself expresses.



SUGGESTED STORIES



“Ad Infinitum”

John Barth





“The Library of Babel”

Jorge Luis Borges





“The Mandelbrot Set”

Janet Burroway





“Ralph the Duck”

Frederick Busch





“Cathedral”

Raymond Carver





“The Babysitter’

Robert Coover





“Town and Country”

Nadine Gordimer





“Mobius the Stripper”

Gabriel Josipovici





“Runaway”

Alice Munro





“A Man Told Me the Story of His Life”

Grace Paley





WRITING PROMPTS



1. One of your stories has been accepted for publication on the condition that you cut it by 25 percent. Figure out your word count goal and edit toward it. Be both aggressive and picky. Cut expendable words, fuse two scenes, do away with this paragraph. Can you get there? Is the story better for it?

2. If you did the postcard story on page 152, go back to it now and rewrite it as a full eight- to ten-page story. Develop the characters, give us their dialogue, escalate the conflict, intensify the crisis.



The four prompts below are arranged in order of ascending difficulty. The first is easiest, and likely to produce a bad story. If the story is good, you will have done something more difficult than it asked for (gold star). The second should produce better work. If you choose to do one of the last two, you may already have doomed yourself to the writing craft and will be very poor for a few years while you work out the place that writing will have in your life.



3. Take a simple but specific political, religious, scientific, or moral idea; it should be possible to state it in a single sentence. Write a short story that illustrates the idea. Do not state the idea, but we should understand what it is, and we should also experience it.

4. Take as your title a common proverb or maxim, such as power corrupts or walk softly and carry a big stick or haste makes waste. Write a story that makes the title ironic.

5. Identify a belief that you hold profoundly and passionately. Write a story that explores an instance in which it does not hold true.

6. Write the story that you’ve wanted to write all term but did not write because you knew it was too big for you and you would fail. You may fail. Write it anyway.





