2 SEEING IS BELIEVING: Showing and Telling


2: Seeing Is Believing



SHOWING AND TELLING



Significant Detail

The Imagery of Emotion

Filtering

The Active Voice

Prose Rhythm

Mechanics

Literature offers us feelings for which we do not have to pay. It allows us to love, condemn, condone, hope, dread, and hate without any of the risks those feelings ordinarily involve; for even good feelings—intimacy, power, speed, drunkenness, passion—have consequences, and powerful feelings may risk powerful consequences. Fiction also must contain ideas, which give significance to characters and events. If the ideas are shallow or untrue, the fiction will be correspondingly shallow or untrue. But the ideas must be experienced through or with the characters; they must be felt or the fiction will fail.

Much nonfiction writing, from editorials to advertising, tries to persuade us to feel one way rather than another, largely by means of logic and reasoning. Fiction, by contrast, tries to reproduce the emotional impact of experience. And this is a difficult task, because unlike the images of film and drama, which directly strike the eye and ear, written words are transmitted first to the mind, where they must be translated into images.

In order to move your reader, the standard advice runs, “Show, don’t tell.” This dictum can be confusing, considering that words are all a writer has to work with. What it means is that your job as a fiction writer is to focus attention not on the words, which are inert, nor on the thoughts these words produce, but through these to felt experience, where the vitality of understanding lies. There are techniques for accomplishing this—for making narrative vivid, moving, and resonant—which can be partly learned and always strengthened.



SIGNIFICANT DETAIL

In The Elements of Style, William Strunk Jr. writes:


If those who have studied the art of writing are in accord on any one point, it is this: the surest way to arouse and hold the reader’s attention is by being specific, definite, and concrete. The greatest writers . . . are effective largely because they deal in particulars and report the details that matter.





Specific, definite, concrete, particular details—these are the life of fiction. Details (as every good liar knows) are the stuff of persuasiveness. Mary is sure that Ed forgot to go pay the gas bill last Tuesday, but Ed says, “I know I went, because this old guy in a knit vest was in front of me in the line, and went on and on about his twin granddaughters”—and it is hard to refute a knit vest and twins even if the furnace doesn’t work. John Gardner in The Art of Fiction speaks of details as “proofs,” rather like the steps that together demonstrate a geometric theorem or evidence in a court case. The novelist, he says, “gives us such detail about the streets, stores, weather, politics, and concerns of Cleveland (or wherever the setting is) and such detail about the looks, gestures, and experiences of his characters that we cannot help believing that the story he tells us must be true.”

A detail is “definite” and “concrete” when it appeals to the senses. It should be seen, heard, smelled, tasted, or touched. The most superficial survey of any bookshelf of published fiction will turn up dozens of examples. Here is a fairly obvious one.


It was a narrow room, with a rather high ceiling, and crowded from floor to ceiling with goodies. There were rows and rows of hams and sausages of all shapes and colors—white, yellow, red and black; fat and lean and round and long—rows of canned preserves, cocoa and tea, bright translucent glass bottles of honey, marmalade and jam.





I stood enchanted, straining my ears and breathing in the delightful atmosphere and the mixed fragrance of chocolate and smoked fish and earthy truffles. . . . I spoke into the silence, saying: “Good day” in quite a loud voice; I can still remember how my strained, unnatural tones died away in the stillness. No one answered. And my mouth literally began to water like a spring. One quick, noiseless step and I was beside one of the laden tables. I made one rapturous grab into the nearest glass urn, filled as it chanced with chocolate creams, slipped a fistful into my coat pocket, then reached the door, and in the next second was safely round the corner.





—Thomas Mann, Confessions of Felix Krull, Confidence Man




The passage is a tour through the five senses. Mann lets us see: narrow room, high ceiling, rows of hams and sausages, canned preserves, translucent glass bottles. He lets us smell: fragrance of chocolate and smoked fish and earthy truffles. He lets us hear: “Good day,” unnatural tones died away in the stillness. He lets us taste: to water like a spring. He lets us touch: grab, slipped a fistful into my coat pocket. The writing is alive because Mann lets us perceive the scene as we would live it, through our sense perceptions.

These sense images reverberate, suggesting ideas not stated. We are aware of a number of generalizations the author might have made but does not need to make; we will make them ourselves. Mann could have had his character “tell” us:


I was quite poor, and I was not used to seeing such a profusion of food, so that although I was very afraid there might be someone in the room and I might be caught stealing, I couldn’t resist taking the risk.





Such a version would be flat, and no such telling is necessary, as all of these points are “shown.” The character’s relative poverty is implicit in the tumble of images of sight and smell; if he were used to such displays, his eyes and nose would not dart about as they do. His fear is apparent in the “strained, unnatural tones” of his loud call and its dying away in the stillness. His desire is in his watering mouth, his fear in the furtive speed of quick, grab, slipped.

The points to be made here are two, and they are both important. The first is that the writer must deal in sense detail. The second is that these must be details “that matter.” As a writer of fiction you are at constant pains not simply to say what you mean, but to mean more than you say. Much of what you mean will be an abstraction or a judgment—love requires trust, children can be cruel. But if you write in abstractions or judgments, you are writing an essay, whereas if you let us use our senses and form our own interpretations, we will be involved as participants in a real way. Much of the pleasure of reading comes from the egotistical sense that we are clever enough to understand. When the author explains to us or interprets for us, we suspect that he or she doesn’t think us bright enough to do it for ourselves.

I’m drawn to images and seem to start with them. Or one. Something I imagine, a scene or detail, or even a photograph.



—Rachel Kushner



A detail can also matter if it suggests a change in character or a development in the plot. Chekhov famously said that if a pistol is placed on a mantel in the first act, it must go off in the last. In Stuart Dybek’s story “We Didn’t,” the narrator and his girl have been making out on the beach but are suddenly caught short. “Headlights bounded toward us, spotlights crisscrossing, blue dome lights revolving as squad cars converged.” Here the police cars and searchlights change the scene, represent a turning point in the story, and also act metaphorically as they throw a spotlight on the young couple’s problems.

In this excerpt from Colson Whitehead’s The Underground Railroad, the girl slave Cora has been tending a small garden plot that had belonged to her grandmother:


Wisps of white moisture hovered over the grounds. There she saw it—the remains of what would have been her first cabbages. Heaped by the steps of Blake’s cabin, the tangled vines already drying out. The ground had been turned and tamped to make a nice yard for the mutt’s house, which sat in the center of her plot like a grand mansion in the heart of a plantation.





In this instance, a violation of her territory—both physical and metaphorical—brings a docile girl to find her fierce strength.

A detail is concrete if it appeals to one of the five senses; it is significant if it also conveys an idea or a judgment or both. The windowsill was green is concrete, because we can see it. The windowsill was shedding flakes of fungus-green paint is concrete and also significant because it conveys the idea that the paint is old and suggests the judgment that the color is ugly. The second version can also be seen more vividly.

Here is a passage from a young writer that fails through lack of appeal to the senses:


Debbie was a very stubborn and completely independent person and was always doing things her way despite her parents’ efforts to get her to conform. Her father was an executive in a dress manufacturing company and was able to afford his family all the luxuries and comforts of life. But Debbie was completely indifferent to her family’s affluence.





This passage contains a number of judgments that we might or might not agree with, and the author has not convinced us that we should. What constitutes stubbornness? Independence? Indifference? Affluence? Worse, since the judgments are supported by generalizations, we have no sense of the individuality of the characters, which alone would bring them to life on the page. What things was Debbie always doing? What efforts did her parents make to get her to conform? What level of executive? What dress manufacturing company? What luxuries and comforts? We can fill in the blanks in a multitude of ways:


Debbie would wear a tank top to a tea party if she pleased, with fluorescent earrings and ankle-strap sandals.





“Oh, sweetheart,” Mrs. Chiddister would stand in the doorway wringing her hands. “It’s not nice.”





“Not who?” Debbie would say, and add a fringed belt.





Mr. Chiddister was Style Director of the Boston distributor for Dior and had a high respect for what he called “elegant textures,” which ranged from handwoven tweed to gold filigree, and which he willingly offered his daughter. Debbie preferred her laminated wrist bangles.





We have not passed a final judgment on the merits of these characters, but we now know a good deal more about them, and we have drawn certain interim conclusions that are our own, not forced on us by the author. Debbie is independent of her parents’ values, rather careless of their feelings, energetic, and possibly a tart. Mrs. Chiddister is quite ineffectual. Mr. Chiddister is a snob, though perhaps Debbie’s taste is so bad we’ll end up on his side.

But maybe that isn’t at all what the author had in mind. The point is that we weren’t allowed to know what the author did have in mind. Perhaps it was more like this version:


One day Debbie brought home a copy of Ulysses. Mrs. Strum called it “filth” and threw it across the sunporch. Debbie knelt on the parquet and retrieved her bookmark, which she replaced. “No, it’s not,” she said.





“You’re not so old I can’t take a strap to you!” Mr. Strum reminded her.





Mr. Strum was controlling stockholder of Readywear Conglomerates and was proud of treating his family on his expense account. The summer before, he had justified their company on a trip to Belgium, where they toured the American Cemetery and the torture chambers of Ghent Castle. Entirely ungrateful, Debbie had spent the rest of the trip curled up in the hotel with a shabby copy of some poet.





Here we gain a much clearer understanding of Debbie’s stubbornness, independence, and indifference and her family’s affluence, both their natures and the value we are to place on them. This time our judgment is heavily weighted in Debbie’s favor—partly because people who read books have a sentimental sympathy with people who read books, but also because we hear hysteria in “filth” and “take a strap to you,” whereas Debbie’s resistance is quiet and strong. Mr. Strum’s attitude toward his expense account suggests that he’s corrupt, and his choice of “luxuries” is morbid. The passage does contain two overt judgments, the first being that Debbie was “entirely ungrateful.” But by the time we get to this, we’re aware that the judgment is Mr. Strum’s and have concluded that Debbie has little enough to be grateful for. We understand not only what the author says but also that she means the opposite of what she says, and we feel doubly clever to get it; that is the pleasure of irony. Likewise, the judgment that the poet’s book is “shabby” shows Mr. Strum’s crassly materialist attitude toward what we know to be the finer things. At the very end of the passage, we are denied a detail that we might very well be given: what poet did Debbie curl up with? Again, by this time we understand that we are being given her father’s view of the situation and that it’s Mr. Strum (not Debbie, not the author, and certainly not us) who wouldn’t notice the difference between John Keats and Stanley Kunitz.

An image is a starting point for a novel. It’s a goal to which you can go in your sleep . . . all that matters is that these images move something inside of you.



—Karl Ove Knausgaard



One may object that both rewrites are longer than the original passage. Doesn’t “adding” so much detail make for long writing? The answer is yes and no. Yes, in that detail requires words. No, because what well-chosen details tell us about the values, activities, lifestyles, attitudes, and personalities of the characters would take many more words to tell through generalizations. When you set out to realize your characters through detail, you can’t convey a whole person, or a whole action, or everything that could be said about a single moment of a single day. You must select the significant, the details that convey the characteristics essential to our understanding.

Which details are truly significant, however, may emerge only as you continue to develop and revise your story, for, as Flannery O’Connor says, “the longer you look at one object, the more of the world you see in it.” Certain details “tend to accumulate meaning from the action of the story itself,” becoming “symbolic in the way they work,” she notes. “While having their essential place in the literal level of the story, [details] operate in depth as well as on the surface, increasing the story in every direction.”

No amount of concrete detail will move us, therefore, unless it also implicitly suggests meaning and value. The following passage fails, not because it lacks detail, but because those details lack significance:


Terry Landon, a handsome young man of twenty-two, was six foot four and broad-shouldered. He had medium-length thick blond hair and a natural tan, which set off the blue of his intense and friendly long-lashed eyes.





Here we have a good deal of generic sensory information, but we still know very little about Terry. There are so many broad-shouldered twenty-two-year-olds in the world, so many blonds, and so on. This sort of cataloging of characteristics suggests an all-points bulletin: male Caucasian, medium height, dark hair, last seen wearing gray raincoat. Such a description may help the police locate a suspect in a crowd, but the assumption is that the identity of the person is not known. As an author you want us to know the character individually and immediately.

The fact is that all of our ideas and judgments are formed through sense perceptions, and daily, moment by moment, we receive information that is not merely sensuous in this way. Four people at a cocktail party may do nothing but stand and nibble canapés and may talk nothing but politics and the latest films. But you feel perfectly certain that X is furious at Y, who is flirting with Z, who is wounding Q, who is trying to comfort X. You have only your senses to observe with. How do you reach these conclusions? Through what gestures, glances, tones, touches, choices of words?

It may be that this constant emphasis on judgment makes the author, and the reader, seem opinionated or self-righteous. “I want to present my characters objectively/neutrally. I’m not making any value judgments. I want the reader to make up his or her own mind.” Yet human beings are constantly judging: How was the film? He seemed friendly. What a boring class! Do you like it here? She’s very thin. That’s fascinating. I’m so clumsy. You’re gorgeous tonight. Life is crazy, isn’t it?

When we are not passing such judgments, it’s because we aren’t much interested; we are indifferent. Although you may not want to sanctify or damn your characters, you do want us to care about them, and if you refuse to direct our judgment, you may be inviting our indifference. Usually, when you “don’t want us to judge,” you mean that you want our feelings to be mixed, paradoxical, complex. She’s horribly irritating, but it’s not her fault. He’s sexy, but there’s something cold underlying it. If this is what you mean, then you must direct our judgment in both or several directions, not in none. In Olive Kitteridge, novelist Elizabeth Strout has a central character who is erratic, volatile, and controlling with her family—yet with vulnerable young people, she is sensitive and tender. She’s awful and we feel with her. We recognize her contradictions as quintessentially human (our own?) through the details of what she feels and how she sees.

Even a character who exists only as a type or function will come to life if presented through significant detail, as in this portrait of an aunt in Dorothy Allison’s story “Don’t Tell Me You Don’t Know.” Like many of the female relatives the adult narrator mentions, the aunt embodies a powerful, nurturing force that nonetheless fails to protect the narrator from childhood abuse.


My family runs to heavy women, gravy-fed working women, the kind usually seen in pictures taken at mining disasters. Big women, all of my aunts move under their own power and stalk around telling everybody else what to do. But Aunt Alma was the prototype, the one I had loved most, starting back when she had given us free meals in the roadhouse she’d run for a while. . . . Once there, we’d be fed on chicken gravy and biscuits, and Mama would be fed from the well of her sister’s love and outrage.





For a character who is a “prototype,” we have a remarkably clear image of this woman. Notice how Allison moves us from generalization toward sharpness of image, gradually bringing the character into focus. First she has only a size and gender, then a certain abstract “power,” then a distinct role as the one who “had given us free meals.”

The point is not that you, as an author, must never express an idea, general quality, or judgment, nor must you give us all the details. Some parts of your narrative will inevitably be more effectively told than shown; some periods of action want to passed over with the speed of summary. Too much detail can disperse focus and feel like self-indulgence on the writer’s part. Everyone has read a description that goes on and on, taking up space with this or that minutia when, really, we got it long ago. Sometimes the pace and the magic of fiction is a rapid sail through time and space.

But even in the creation of groups or types, or a quickly passed-over period, a little specificity will bring a scene alive. Here in the clipped, matter-of-fact prose of Yaa Gyasi’s Homegoing, a group of Pratt City, Alabama, miners have gone on strike:


It took six more months of striking for the bosses to give in. They would all be paid fifty cents more. The running boy was the only one to die in the struggle. The pay increase was a small victory, but one that they would all take. After the day the running boy died, the strikers helped clean up the mess the fight had made. They picked up their shovels, found the boy who’d been gunned down, and buried him in the potter’s field.





This passage contains many generalizations and categories that are given no particular imagery: six more months, bosses, give in, pay increase, victory, all, strikers, mess, fight. The “running boy,” however, is a vivid image recalled from an earlier scene in which this child was humiliated and in flight. It’s important that the pay increase is precisely fifty cents, because that matters to the men. And “picked up their shovels” particularizes the action of accepting the settlement. Note also how much would be lost if the narrative ended on a vague note: “found the boy who’d been gunned down and buried him.” That he is buried “in the potter’s field” conveys both the compassion and the poverty of the miners’ circumstance.

In all genres, I wait in ambush for the exact, perfect, telling detail, the thing that makes the scene or line come alive.



—Lauren Groff



Here is a still more intense presentation of an experience through a combination of judgment and detail:


My wife could take your skin off with one glance, she was that excruciating. She could call you to her with one finger. She could do long division in her head. Another thing she could do really well was sob, and I envied her this, assuming it left nothing to eat at her inside. It is easy to be wrong about a person you are used to.





—Emily Fridlund, “Expecting”




You may notice that even in the Thomas Mann passage quoted on pages 23–24, there are many generalizations and judgments (narrow, high, rows and rows, all shapes and colors, enchanted, delightful, strained, unnatural), each juiced with detail.


The Imagery of Emotion

“People can feel what they have not experienced,” said the actress Mildred Dunnock—and fiction’s job is to make us feel. But to evoke those feelings, it is often necessary to portray sensory details that the reader may have experienced. Simply labeling a character’s emotion as love or hatred will have little effect, for such abstraction operates on a vague, intellectual level, whereas emotion is the body’s physical reaction to information the senses receive. The great Russian director Konstantin Stanislavski, originator of realistic “Method” acting, urged his students to abandon the grand emotive postures of the nineteenth-century stage in favor of emotions evoked by the actor’s recollection of sensory details connected with a personal past trauma. By recalling such details as the tingling of fingertips, the smell of singed hair, and the tensing of calf muscles, an emotion such as anger might naturally be induced within the actor’s body.

Good writers may “tell” about almost anything in fiction except the characters’ feelings. . . . Fear, love, excitement, doubt, embarrassment, despair become real only when they take the form of events—action (or gesture), dialogue or physical reaction to setting. Detail is the lifeblood of fiction.



—John Gardner



Similarly, in written fiction, if the writer depicts the precise physical sensations experienced by a character, a particular emotion may be triggered by the reader’s own sense memory. For example, toward the end of Joyce Carol Oates’s story “Where Are You Going, Where Have You Been?” the protagonist is so terrified that “the kitchen looked like a place she had never seen before.” She tries to phone for help but “her fingers groped down to the dial but were too weak to touch it.” Her beating heart seems “just a pounding, living thing inside this body that wasn’t hers either.” Here the reader may reflexively identify through a personal memory of fear, or perhaps a nightmare, in which vision became blurred, fingers fumbled at urgent tasks, a pumping heart felt too big for its chest. To simply state that the main character is afraid sets her at a dispassionate distance, but to dramatize her fear through physical detail allows a reader to share the experience.

One reason to avoid labeling emotion is that emotion is seldom pure. Conflicting feelings often run together; we experience but rarely stop to analyze our passions as we’re caught up in them. In his story “The Easy Way,” Tom Perrotta describes the moment in which a lottery winner learns of a jealous friend’s death: “I stood perfectly still and let the news expand inside of me, like a bubble in my chest that wouldn’t rise or pop. I waited for anger or grief to fill the space it opened, but all I felt just then was an unsteadiness in my legs, a faulty connection with the ground.” By tracing the physical reaction and staying true to the shock of the moment, Perrotta conveys the complex impact of this loss.

Finding the specific expression of an emotion is hard. It is one of the most difficult things that a writer is consistently called upon to do. Yet neurobiologists assure us that this is what emotion is: a sensory response within the body to sensory input from the outside world, often in the presence of a basic need—food, sex, fight-or-flight. Unfortunately we are completely untrained in specifying these bodily reactions, and there are far too few ways of saying them. The Hawaiians may have seventy words for “pink,” but when the doctor asks us to describe a pain, it’s on a scale of one to ten, sharp or ache or throbbing?

Nevertheless, it’s worth sitting with the image of your character’s particular emotion and trying to find exactly how and where it resides in the body. I once had a character homesick in Japan. I tried and tried to describe the way homesickness felt in her stomach. It was heavy, hollow, upset—all too vague. Then I realized that she had just bought something from a street vendor thinking it was some kind of sweet. I had her eat one, which turned out to be an uncooked roll that had “an alkaline taste” and “was slimy on the roof of my mouth.” Unwilling to spit it out on the street, she swallows it and it “seemed to lodge in my diaphragm, heavy and unassailable by digestive juices.”

Style is a very simple matter; it is all rhythm. Once you get that, you can’t use the wrong words. But on the other hand here am I sitting after half the morning, crammed with ideas and visions, and so on, and can’t dislodge them, for lack of the right rhythm.



—Virginia Woolf



Seek the exact as opposed to the extreme. “Get control of emotion by avoiding the mention of the emotion,” urges John L’Heureux. “To avoid melodrama, aim for a restrained tone rather than an exaggerated one.” Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie demonstrates the principle in this passage from Half of a Yellow Sun. The heroine Olanna has come to visit her relatives during the Biafran war, only to find them slaughtered. Rather than saying some such thing as “I was numb with shock,” the narrative registers shock with extreme focus:


She opened the car door and climbed out. She paused for a moment because of how glaringly bright and hot it was, with flames billowing from the roof, with grit and ash floating in the air, before she began to run toward the house. She stopped when she saw the bodies. Uncle Mbaezi lay facedown in an ungainly twist, legs splayed. Something creamy-white oozed through the large gash on the back of his head. Aunty Ifeka lay on the veranda. The cuts on her naked body were smaller, dotting her arms and legs like slightly parted red lips.





Filtering

John Gardner, in The Art of Fiction, points out a third potential failure, in addition to the faults of insufficient detail and excessive abstraction:


the needless filtering of the image through some observing consciousness. The amateur writes: “Turning, she noticed two snakes fighting in among the rocks.” Compare: “She turned. In among the rocks, two snakes were fighting . . .” Generally speaking—though no laws are absolute in fiction—vividness urges that almost every occurrence of such phrases as “she noticed” and “she saw” be suppressed in favor of direct presentation of the thing seen.





The filter is a common fault and often difficult to recognize—although once the principle is grasped, cutting away filters is an easy means to more vivid writing. As a fiction writer you will often be working through “some observing consciousness.” Yet when you step back and ask readers to observe the observer—to look at rather than through the character—you start to tell-not-show and rip us briefly out of the scene. Here, for example, is a student passage quite competent except for the filtering:


Mrs. Blair made her way to the chair by the window and sank gratefully into it. She looked out the window and there, across the street, she saw the ivory BMW parked in front of the fire plug once more. It seemed to her, though, that something was wrong with it. She noticed that it was listing slightly toward the back and side, and then saw that the back rim was resting almost on the asphalt.





Remove the filters from this paragraph and we are allowed to stay in Mrs. Blair’s consciousness, watching with her eyes, sharing understanding as it unfolds for her:


Mrs. Blair made her way to the chair by the window and sank gratefully into it. Across the street the ivory BMW was parked in front of the fire plug again. Something was wrong with it, though. It was listing toward the back and side, the back rim resting almost on the asphalt.





A similar filtering occurs when the writer begins a flashback and mistakenly supposes that the reader is not clever enough to follow along without a guiding transition:


Mrs. Blair thought back to the time that she and Henry had owned an ivory car, though it had been a Chevy. She remembered clearly that it had a hood shaped like a sugar scoop, and chrome bumpers that stuck out a foot front and back. And there was that funny time, she recalled, when Henry had to change the flat tire on Alligator Alley, and she’d thought the alligators would come up out of the swamp.





Just as the present scene will be more present to the reader without a filter, so will we be taken more thoroughly back to the time of the memory without a filter:


She and Henry had owned an ivory car once, though it had been a Chevy, with a hood shaped like a sugar scoop and chrome bumpers that stuck out a foot front and back. And there was that funny time Henry had to change the flat tire on Alligator Alley, and she’d thought the alligators would come up out of the swamp.





Observe that the pace of the reading is improved by the removal of the filters—at least partly, literally, because one or two lines of type have been removed.



THE ACTIVE VOICE

If your prose is to be vigorous as well as vivid, if your characters are to “come to life,” you must make use of the active voice.

The active voice occurs when the subject of a sentence performs the action described by the verb of that sentence: She spilled the milk. When the passive voice is used, the object of the active verb becomes the subject of the passive verb: The milk was spilled by her. The subject is acted upon rather than acting, and the effect is to weaken the prose and to distance the reader from the action.

The passive voice does have an important place in fiction, precisely because it expresses a sense that the character is being acted upon. If a prison guard is kicking the hero, then I was slammed into the wall; I was struck blindingly from behind and forced to the floor appropriately carries the sense of his helplessness.

In general, however, you should seek to use the active voice in all prose and to use the passive only when the actor is unknown or insignificant or when you want to achieve special stylistic effects like the one above.

But there are other grammatical constructions that are in effect passive and can distance the reader from a sense of immediate experience. Verbs modified by auxiliaries are effectively passive because they suggest an indefinite time and are never as sharply focused as simple active verbs. (Further editing the example cited above, Gardner contrasts the phrase “two snakes were fighting” with the improved “two snakes fought,” which pinpoints a specific moment, and then suggests substituting active verbs, as in “two snakes whipped and lashed.”)

Linking verbs invite complements that tend to be generalized or judgmental: Her hair looked beautiful. He was very happy. The room seemed expensively furnished. They became morose. Let her hair bounce, tumble, cascade, or swing; we’ll see its beauty. Let him laugh, leap, cry, or hug a tree; we’ll experience his joy.

The following is a passage with very little action, nevertheless made vital by the use of active verbs:


At Mixt she neither drinks nor eats. Each of the sisters furtively stares at her as she tranquilly sits in post-Communion meditation with her hands immersed in her habit. Lectio has been halted for the morning, so there is only the Great Silence and the tinks of cutlery, but handsigns are being traded as the sisters lard their hunks of bread or fold and ring their dinner napkins. When the prioress stands, all rise up with her for the blessing, and then Sister Aimee gives Mariette the handsigns. You, infirmary.





—Ron Hansen, Mariette in Ecstasy




Here, though the convent meal is silent and action is minimal, a number of the verbs suggest suppressed power: stares, sits, lard, fold, ring, stands, rise, gives.

Compare the first passage about Debbie on page 26 with the second of the rewrites on page 27. In the generalized original we have was stubborn, was doing things, was an executive, was able, was indifferent. Apart from the compound verb was doing, all of these are linking verbs. In the rewrite the characters brought, called, threw, knelt, retrieved, replaced, said, reminded, justified, toured, spent, and curled up. What energetic people! The rewrite contains two linking verbs: Mr. Strum was a stockholder and was proud; these properly represent static states, a position and an attitude.

One beneficial side effect of active verbs is that they tend to call forth significant details. If you say “she was shocked,” you are telling us; but if you are to show us that she was shocked through an action, you are likely to have to search for an image as well. “She clenched the arm of the chair so hard that her knuckles whitened.” Clenched and whitened actively suggest shock, and at the same time we see her knuckles on the arm of the chair.

To be is the most common linking verb and also the most overused, but all of the linking verbs invite generalization and distance. To feel, to seem, to look, to appear, to experience, to express, to show, to demonstrate, to convey, to display—all suggest, in fiction, that the character is being acted upon or observed by someone rather than doing something. She felt happy/sad/amused/mortified does not convince us. We want to see her and infer her emotion for ourselves. He very clearly conveyed his displeasure. It isn’t clear to us. How did he convey it? To whom?

Good writing is music. . . . It should not be a destination but a journey. It must concentrate, via the inner ear or even the voice reading aloud, on sound, on the balance of syllables, long, short, hard, soft, arranged in a graceful order.



—Rosellen Brown



Linking verbs, like the passive voice, can appropriately convey a sense of passivity or helplessness when that is the desired effect. In the passage by Thomas Mann quoted earlier in this chapter, where Felix Krull is momentarily stunned by the sight of the food before him, linking verbs are used—It was a narrow room, there were rows and rows—while all the colors and shapes buffet his senses. Only as he gradually recovers can he stand, breathe, speak, and eventually grab.

I don’t mean to suggest that as an author you should analyze your grammar as you go along. Most word choice is instinctive, and instinct is often the best guide. However, I do mean to suggest that you should be aware of the vigor and variety of available verbs, and that if a passage lacks energy, it may be because your instinct has let you down. How often are subjects portrayed in some condition or seen to be acted upon, when they could more forcefully do?

A note of caution about active verbs: Make sparing use of what John Ruskin called the “pathetic fallacy”—the attributing of human emotions to natural and man-made objects. Even a description of a static scene can be invigorated if the houses stand, the streets wander, and the trees bend. But if the houses frown, the streets stagger drunkenly, and the trees weep, we will feel more strain than energy in the writing.



PROSE RHYTHM

Novelists and short story writers are not under the same obligation as poets to reinforce sense with sound. In prose, on the whole, the rhythm is all right if it isn’t clearly wrong. But it can be wrong if, for example, the cadence contradicts the meaning; on the other hand, rhythm can greatly enhance the meaning if it is sensitively used.


The river moved slowly. It seemed sluggish. The surface lay flat. Birds circled lazily overhead. Jon’s boat slipped forward.





In this extreme example, the short, clipped sentences and their parallel structures—subject, verb, modifier—work against the sense of slow, flowing movement. The rhythm could be effective if the character whose eyes we’re using is not appreciating or sharing the calm; otherwise it needs recasting.


The surface lay flat on the sluggish, slow-moving river, the birds circling lazily overhead as Jon’s boat slipped forward.





There is nothing very striking about the rhythm of this version, but at least it moves forward without obstructing the flow of the river.


The first impression I had as I stopped in the doorway of the immense City Room was of extreme rush and bustle, with the reporters moving rapidly back and forth in the long aisles in order to shove their copy at each other or making frantic gestures as they shouted into their many telephones.





This long and leisurely sentence cannot possibly provide a sense of rush and bustle. The phrases need to move as fast as the reporters; the verbiage must be pared down because it slows them down.


I stopped in the doorway. The City Room was immense, reporters rushing down the aisles, shoving copy at each other, bustling back again, flinging gestures, shouting into telephones.





The poet Rolfe Humphries remarked that “very is the least very word in the language.” It is frequently true that adverbs expressing emphasis or suddenness—extremely, rapidly, suddenly, phenomenally, quickly, immediately, instantly, definitely, terribly, awfully—slow the sentence down and dilute the force of the intended meaning. “‘It’s a very nice day,’” said Humphries, “is not as nice a day as ‘It’s a day!’” Likewise, “They stopped very abruptly” is not as abrupt as “They stopped.”

Just as action and character can find an echo in prose rhythm, so the starts and stops of prose tempo can guide our experience of a character’s emotions and attitudes. In the following passage from Persuasion, Jane Austen combines generalization, passive verbs, and a staccato speech pattern to produce a kind of breathless blindness in the heroine.


A thousand feelings rushed on Anne, of which this was the most consoling, that it would soon be over. And it was soon over. In two minutes after Charles’s preparation, the others appeared; they were in the drawing room. Her eye half met Captain Wentworth’s, a bow, a courtesy passed; she heard his voice—he talked to Mary, said all that was right; said something to the Miss Musgroves, enough to mark an easy footing; the room seemed full—full of persons and voices—but a few minutes ended it.





Often a change in the prose rhythm will signal a discovery or change in mood; such a shift can also reinforce a contrast in characters, actions, and attitudes. In “The Things They Carried,” Tim O’Brien demonstrates a range of rhythms with a rich variation of effects. Here is one:


The things they carried were largely determined by necessity. Among the necessities or near-necessities were P-38 can openers, pocket knives, heat tabs, wristwatches, dog tags, mosquito repellent, chewing gum, candy, cigarettes, salt tablets, packets of Kool-Aid, lighters, matches, sewing kits, Military Payment Certificates, C rations, and two or three canteens of water. Together, these items weighed between 15 and 20 pounds.





In this passage the piling of items one on the other has the effect of loading the men down and at the same time suggests the rhythm of their marching as they “hump” their stuff. Similar lists through the story create a rhythmic thread, while variations and stoppages underlie shifts of emotion and sudden crises.



MECHANICS

Significant detail, the active voice, and prose rhythm are techniques for achieving the sensuous in fiction, means of helping the reader “sink into the dream” of the story, in John Gardner’s phrase. Yet no technique is of much use if the reader’s eye is wrenched back to the surface by misspellings or grammatical errors, for once the reader has been startled out of the story’s “vivid and continuous dream,” that reader may not return.

An idea has to have some dirt on its shoes, or it’s just air.



—Marvin Bell



Spelling, grammar, paragraphing, and punctuation are a kind of magic; their purpose is to be invisible. If the sleight of hand works, we will not notice a comma or a quotation mark but will translate each instantly into a pause or an awareness of voice; we will not focus on the individual letters of a word but extract its sense whole. When the mechanics are incorrectly used, the trick is revealed and the magic fails; the reader’s focus is shifted from the story to its surface. The reader is irritated at the author, and of all the emotions the reader is willing to experience, irritation at the author is not one.

There is no intrinsic virtue in standardized mechanics, and you can depart from them whenever you produce a result that adequately compensates for a distracting effect. But only then. Sloppy mechanics signal amateurism to an editor and suggest that the story itself may be flawed. Unlike the techniques of narrative, the rules of spelling, grammar, and punctuation can be coldly learned anywhere in the English-speaking world—and they should be learned by anyone who aspires to write.



SUGGESTED STORIES



“Fjords of Killarney”

Kevin Barry





“Widow Water”

Frederick Busch





“Linoleum Rose”

Sandra Cisneros





“Without Inspection”

Edwidge Danticat





“Expecting”

Emily Fridlund





“Teen Sniper”

Adam Johnson





“Emergency”

Denis Johnson





“Where Are You Going, Where Have You Been?”

Joyce Carol Oates





“The Things They Carried”

Tim O’Brien





“Everything That Rises Must Converge”

Flannery O’Connor





WRITING PROMPTS



1. Write a paragraph using significant details and active verbs about a character who conveys one of the following:

• just adorable

• complete nerd

• brains fried

• local psycho

• leaning in

• who does he think he is?





2. Take a scene you have already written and “shrink for details.” Imagine yourself from the vantage of something very small—no bigger than a button, an earlobe, a baked bean—and write a page using the details you see from that perspective.

3. Write a passage in which a character enters a place and experiences the scene primarily through the sense of smell.

4. Imagine a character in a difficult or frightening situation. Write a passage beginning with the character’s action, then show us the scene through the character’s eyes. Use no “filters.”

5. Give a character some illness or injury. Describe the pain or discomfort with exact reference to where the body hurts; detail the nature of the pain. (It’s hard!)

6. Write a short sketch describing a person or an experience combining generalizations or judgments with details. Make the details significant and concrete. Rewrite it making the details extreme. Rewrite it making the details outrageous. Which version works best? Is the last one funny?

7. Write about one of the following and suggest the rhythm of the subject in your prose: a machine, a piece of music, sex, a spaceship in orbit, a car in rush-hour traffic, an avalanche.





