The Density of Occupation of the World Made Possible by Trade

This ‘chain reaction’ sparked by new settlement and trade may be studied more closely. While some animals are adapted to particular and rather limited environmental ‘niches’ outside of which they can hardly exist, men and a few other animals such as rats have been able to adapt themselves almost everywhere on the surface of the earth. This is hardly due merely to adaptations by individuals. Only a few and relatively small localities would have provided small bands of hunters and gatherers all that even the most primitive tool-using groups need for a settled existence, and still less all they needed to till the earth. Without support from fellows elsewhere, most humans would find the places they wish to occupy either uninhabitable or able to be settled only very thinly.

Those few relatively self-sustaining niches that did exist would likely be the first in any particular area to be permanently occupied and defended against intruders. Yet people living there would come to know of neighbouring places that provided most but not all their needs, and which would lack some substance they would require only occasionally：flint, strings for their bows, glues to fix cutting blades into handles, tanning materials for hides, and such like. Confident that such needs could be met by infrequent return visits to their present homes, they would stride out from their groups, and occupy some of these neighbouring places, or other new territory even further away in other parts of the thinly populated continents on which they lived. The importance of these early movements of persons and of necessary goods cannot be gauged by volume alone. Without the availability of imports, even if they formed only an insignificant fraction of what was currently being consumed in any particular place, it would have been impossible for early settlers to maintain themselves, let alone to multiply.

Return visits to replenish supplies would raise no difficulties so long as the migrants were still known to those who had remained at home. Within a few generations, however, descendants of these original groups would begin to seem strangers to one another; and those inhabiting the original more self-sustaining localities would often begin to defend themselves and their supplies in various ways. To gain permission to enter the original territory for the purpose of obtaining whatever special substances could be obtained only there, visitors would, to herald their peaceful intentions and to tempt the desires of its occupants, have had to bring presents. To be most effective, these gifts had best not satisfy everyday needs readily met locally, but would need to be enticingly new and unusual ornaments or delicacies. This is one reason why objects offered on one side of such transactions were, in fact, so often ‘luxuries’ – which hardly means that the objects exchanged were not necessities for the other side.

Initially, regular connections involving exchange of presents would probably have developed between families with mutual obligations of hospitality connected in complex ways with the rituals of exogamy. The transition from the practice of giving presents to such family members and relations, to the appearance of more impersonal institutions of hosts or ‘brokers’ who routinely sponsored such visitors and gained for them permission to stay long enough to obtain what they needed, and on to the practice of exchanging particular things at rates determined by their relative scarcity, was no doubt slow. But from the recognition of a minimum still regarded as appropriate, and of a maximum at which the transaction seemed no longer worthwhile, specific prices for particular objects will gradually have emerged. Also inevitably, traditional equivalents will steadily have adapted to changed conditions.

In any case, in early Greek history we do find the important institution of the xenos, the guest-friend, who assured individual admission and protection within an alien territory. Indeed, trade must have developed very much as a matter of personal relations, even if the warrior aristocracy disguised it as being no more than mutual exchange of gifts. And it was not only those who were already wealthy who could afford hospitality to members of particular families in other regions：such relations also would have made people rich by providing channels through which important needs of their community could be satisfied. The xenos at Pylos and Sparta to whom Telemachos goes to get news of his ‘much travelled father Odysseus’ (Odyssey：III) was probably such a trading partner who by his wealth had risen to become king.

Such enlarged opportunities to deal advantageously with outsiders no doubt also helped to reinforce the break that had by then already occurred away from the solidarity, common aims, and collectivism of the original small groups. In any case, some individuals did tear away, or were released, from the hold and obligations of the small community, and began not only to settle other communities, but also to lay the foundations for a network of connections with members of still other communities – a network that ultimately, in countless relays and ramifications, has covered the whole earth. Such individuals were enabled to contribute their shares, albeit unknowingly and unintentionally, towards the building of a more complex and extensive order – an order far beyond their own or their contemporaries’ purview.

To create such an order, such individuals had to be able to use information for purposes known only to themselves. They could not have done so without the benefit of certain practices, such as that of the xenos, shared in common with distant groups. The practices would have to be common; but the particular knowledge and ends of those individuals following such practices could differ, and could be based on privileged information. This, in turn, would have spurred individual initiative.

For only an individual, not his group, could gain peaceful admission to an alien territory, and thereby acquire knowledge not possessed by his fellows. Trade could not be based on collective knowledge, only on distinctive individual knowledge. Only the growing recognition of several property could have made such use of individual initiative possible. The shippers and other traders were guided by personal gain; yet soon the wealth and livelihood of the growing population of their home towns, which they made possible through the pursuit of gain through trade rather than production, could be maintained only by their continuing initiative in discovering ever new opportunities.

Lest what we have just written mislead, it must be remembered that why men should ever have adopted any particular new custom or innovation is of secondary importance. What is more important is that in order for a custom or innovation to be preserved, there were two distinct prerequisites. Firstly, there must have existed some conditions that made possible the preservation through generations of certain practices whose benefits were not necessarily understood or appreciated. Secondly, there must have been the acquisition of distinct advantages by those groups that kept to such customs, thereby enabling them to expand more rapidly than others and ultimately to supersede (or absorb) those not possessing similar customs.





