The Centre and the Periphery

And it may indeed end there：I do not think that the much-dreaded population explosion – leading to ‘standing room only’ – is going to occur. The whole story of population growth may now be approaching its end, or at least approaching a very new level. For the highest population growth has never taken place in developed market economies but always on the peripheries of developed economies, among those poor who had no fertile land and equipment that would have enabled them to maintain themselves, but to whom ‘capitalists’ offered new opportunities for survival.

These peripheries are, however, disappearing. Moreover, there are hardly any countries left to enter the periphery：the explosive process of population expansion has, during the last generation or so, very nearly reached the last corners of the earth.

Consequently there is strong reason to doubt the accuracy of extrapolating the trend of the last several centuries – of an indefinitely increasing acceleration of population growth – into the indefinite future. We may hope and expect that once the remaining reservoir of people who are now entering the extended order is exhausted, the growth of their numbers, which distresses people so much, will gradually recede. After all, no fairly wealthy group shows any such tendency. We do not know enough to say when the turning point will be reached, but we can fairly assume that it will be very long indeed before we approach the horrors which the fancy of the ineluctable indefinite increase of mankind conjures up.

I suspect that the problem is already diminishing：that the population growth rate is now approaching, or has already reached, its maximum, and will not increase much further but will decline. One cannot of course say for certain, but it appears that – even if this has not already occurred – some time in the last decade of this century population growth will reach a maximum and that, afterwards, it will decline unless there is deliberate intervention to stimulate it.

Already in the mid 1960’s, the annual rate of growth of the developing regions peaked at around 2.4 percent, and began to decline to the present level of around 2.1 percent. And the population growth rate in more developed regions was already on the decline by this same time. In the mid ’sixties, then, population seems to have reached, and then retreated from, an all-time high annual growth rate (United Nations, 1980, and J. E. Cohen, 1984:50-51). As Cohen writes：‘humankind has begun to practice or to experience the restraint that governs all its fellow species.’

The processes at work may become more comprehensible if we take a closer look at the populations at the peripheries of the developing economies. The best examples are perhaps to be found in those fast-growing cities of the developing world – Mexico City, Cairo, Calcutta, Sao Paulo or Jakarta, Caracas, Lagos, Bombay – where the population has doubled or more over a short span and where old city centers tend to be surrounded by shanty towns or ‘bidonvilles’.

The increase of population taking place in these cities stems from the fact that people living on peripheries of market economies, while already profiting from their participation in them (through, for example, access to more advanced medicine, to better information of all sorts, and to advanced economic institutions and practices), have nonetheless not adapted fully to the traditions, morality, and customs of these economies. For example, they still may practice customs of procreation stemming from circumstances outside the market economy where, for instance, the first response of poor people to a slight increase of wealth had been to produce a number of descendants at least sufficient to provide for them in their old age. These old customs are now gradually, and in some places even quickly, disappearing, and these peripheral groups, particularly those closest to the core, are absorbing traditions that allow them better to regulate their propagation. After all, the growing commercial centers become magnets in part just because they provide models of how to achieve through imitation what many people desire.

These shanty towns, which are interesting in themselves, also illustrate several other themes developed earlier. For example, the population of the countryside around these cities has not been depleted at the expense of the shanty towns; usually it too has profited from the growth of the cities. The cities offered sustenance to millions who otherwise would have died or never been born had they (or their parents) not migrated to them. Those who did migrate to the cities (or to their peripheries) were led there neither by the benevolence of the city folk in offering jobs and equipment nor by the benevolent advice of their better-off country ‘neighbours’, but rather by following rumours about other unknown poor folk (perhaps in some remote mountain valley) who were saved by being drawn into the growing towns by news of paid work available there. Ambition, even greed, for a better life, not beneficence, preserved these lives：yet it did better than beneficence could have done. The people from the countryside learned from market signals – although they could hardly have understood the matter in such abstract terms – that income not currently consumed by rich men in the cities was being used to provide others with tools or livelihood in payment for work, enabling people to survive who had not inherited arable land and the tools to cultivate it.

Of course it may be hard for some to accept that those living in these shanty towns deliberately chose them over the countryside (about which people have such romantic feelings) as places of sustenance. Yet, as with the Irish and English peasants Engels found in the Manchester slums of his own time, that is what happened.

The squalor of these peripheral areas is primarily due to the very economic marginality that dictated residence there rather than in the countryside. Also not to be ignored are the adverse ‘cyclical’ effects of third-world governments’ attempts to manage their economies, and of the ability of these governments to remove employment opportunities from peripheral groups as concessions to established labour interests or misguided social reformers.

Finally – and here one may sometimes witness the selection process at something like first hand, and in its most naked form – the effects of commercial morals do not fall most harshly and visibly on those who have already learnt to practise them in a relatively more advanced form, but rather on newcomers who have not yet learnt how to cope with them. Those who live on the peripheries do not yet fully observe the new practices (and thus are almost always perceived as ‘undesirable’ and often thought even to border on the criminal). They are also experiencing personally the first impact that some practices of more advanced civilisation exert on people who still feel and think according to the morality of the tribe and village. However painful for them this process may be, they too, or they especially, benefit from the division of labour formed by the practices of the business classes; and many of them gradually change their ways, only then improving the quality of their lives. At least a minimal change of conduct on their part will be a condition for their being permitted to enter the larger established group and gradually to gain an increasing share in its total product.

For the numbers kept alive by differing systems of rules decide which system will dominate. These systems of rules will not necessarily be those that the masses (of which the shanty-town dwellers are only a dramatic example) themselves have already fully adopted, but those followed by a nucleus around whose periphery increasing numbers gather to participate in gains from the growing total product. Those who do at least partially adopt, and benefit from, the practices of the extended order often do so without being aware of the sacrifices such changes will also eventually involve. Nor is it only primitive country folk who have had to learn hard lessons：military conquerors who lorded over a subject population and even destroyed its elite often later had to learn, sometimes to their regret, that to enjoy local benefits required adopting local practices.





