The Expansion of Order into the Unknown

Having reviewed some of the circumstances in which the extended order arose, and how this order both engenders and requires several property, liberty and justice, we may now trace some further connections by looking more closely at some other matters already alluded to – in particular, the development of trade, and the specialisation that is linked to it. These developments, which also contributed greatly to the growth of an extended order, were little understood at the time, or indeed for centuries afterwards, even by the greatest scientists and philosophers; certainly no one ever deliberately arranged them.

The times, circumstances, and processes of which we write are cloaked in the mists of time, and details cannot be discerned with any confidence of accuracy. Some specialisation and exchange may already have developed in early small communities guided entirely by the consent of their members. Some nominal trade may have taken place as primitive men, following the migration of animals, encountered other men and groups of men. While archaeological evidence for very early trade is convincing it is not only rare but also tends to be misleading. The essentials that trade served to procure were mostly consumed without leaving a trace – whereas rarities brought to tempt their owners to part with these necessities were often meant to be kept and therefore more durable. Ornaments, weapons, and tools provide our chief positive evidence, while we can only infer from the absence in the locality of essential natural resources used in their manufacture that these must have been acquired by trade. Nor is archaeology likely to find the salt that people obtained over long distances; but the remuneration that the producers of salt received for selling it sometimes does remain. Yet it was not the desire for luxury but necessity that made trade an indispensable institution to which ancient communities increasingly owed their very existence.

However these things may be, trade certainly came very early, and trade over great distances, and in articles whose source is unlikely to have been known to those traders engaged in it, is far older than any other contact among remote groups that can now be traced. Modern archaeology confirms that trade is older than agriculture or any other sort of regular production (Leakey, 1981:212). In Europe there is evidence of trade over very great distances even in the Palaeolithic age, at least 30,000 years ago (Herskovits, 1948, 1960). Eight thousand years ago, Catal Hüyük in Anatolia and Jericho in Palestine had become centres of trade between the Black and the Red Seas, even before trade in pottery and metals had begun. Both also provide early instances of those ‘dramatic increases of population’ often described as cultural revolutions. Later, ‘a network of shipping and land routes existed by the late seventh millennium B.C. for carrying obsidian from the island of Melos to the mainland’ of Asia Minor and Greece (see S. Green’s introduction to Childe, 1936/1981; and Renfrew, 1973:29, cf. also Renfrew, 1972:297–307). There is ‘evidence for extensive trade networks linking Baluchistan (in West Pakistan) with regions in western Asia even before 3200 B.C.’ (Childe, 1936/1981:19). We also know that the economy of predynastic Egypt was firmly based on trade (Pirenne, 1934).

The importance of regular trade in Homeric times is indicated by the story in the Odyssey (I, 180–184) in which Athena appears to Telemachos in the guise of the master of a ship carrying a cargo of iron to be exchanged for copper. The great expansion of trade which made possible the later rapid growth of classical civilisation appears from archaeological evidence also to have occurred at a time for which almost no historical documentation is available, that is, during the two hundred years from about 750 to 550 B.C. The expansion of trade also seems to have brought about, at roughly the same time, rapid increases of population in Greek and Phoenician centres of trade. These centres so rivalled each other in establishing colonies that by the beginning of the classical era life at the great centres of culture had become wholly dependent on a regular market process.

The existence of trade in these early times is incontestable, as is its role in spreading order. Yet the establishment of such a market process could hardly have been easy, and must have been accompanied by a substantial disruption of the early tribes. Even where some recognition of several property had emerged, further and previously unheard of practices would have been required before communities would be inclined to permit members to carry away for use by strangers (and for purposes only partly understood even by the traders themselves, let alone the local populace) desirable items held within the community that might otherwise have been available for local common use. For example, the shippers of the rising Greek cities who took pottery jugs filled with oil or wine to the Black Sea, Egypt or Sicily to exchange them for grain, in the process took away, to people of whom their neighbours knew virtually nothing, goods which those neighbours themselves much desired. By allowing this to happen, members of the small group must have lost their very bearings and begun to reorient to a new comprehension of the world, one in which the importance of the small group itself was much reduced. As Piggott explains in Ancient Europe, ‘Prospectors and miners, traders and middlemen, the organisation of shipments and caravans, concessions and treaties, the concept of alien peoples and customs in distant lands – all these are involved in the enlargement of social comprehension demanded by the technological step of entering . . . a bronze age’ (Piggott, 1965:72). As the same author writes about the middle bronze age of the second millennium, ‘The network of routes by sea, river and land gives an international character to much of the bronze-working of that time, and we find techniques and styles widely distributed from one end of Europe to the other’ (ibid., 118).

What practices eased these new departures and ushered in not only a new comprehension of the world but even a kind of ‘internationalisation’ (the word is of course anachronistic) of style, technique, and attitudes? They must at least have included hospitality, protection, and safe passage (see next section). The vaguely defined territories of primitive tribes were presumably, even at an early date, interlaced by trading connections among individuals based on such practices. Such personal connections would provide successive links in chains over which small yet indispensable amounts of ‘trace elements’, as it were, were transmitted over great distances. This made sedentary occupations, and thus specialisation, possible in many new localities – and likewise eventually increased the density of population. A chain reaction began：the greater density of population, leading to the discovery of opportunities for specialisation, or division of labour, led to yet further increases of population and per capita income that made possible another increase in the population. And so on.





