Morals and Reason：Some Examples

Lest I be thought to exaggerate, I shall provide, in a moment, a few examples. But I do not want to be unfair to our great scientists and philosophers, some of whose ideas I shall discuss. Although they, in their own opinions, illustrate the significance of the problem – that our philosophy and natural science are far from understanding the role played by our chief traditions – they themselves are not usually directly responsible for the wide dissemination of these ideas, for they have better things to do. On the other hand, it should also not be supposed that the remarks I am about to cite are merely momentary or idiosyncratic aberrations on the part of their distinguished authors：rather, they are consistent conclusions drawn from a well-established rationalist tradition. And indeed I do not doubt that some of these great thinkers have striven to comprehend the extended order of human cooperation – if only to end as determined, and often unwitting, opponents of this order.

Those who have really done most to spread these ideas, the real bearers of constructivist rationalism and socialism, are, however, not these distinguished scientists. They rather tend to be the so-called ‘intellectuals’ that I have elsewhere (1949/1967:178–94) unkindly called professional ‘second-hand dealers in ideas’：teachers, journalists and ‘media representatives’ who, having absorbed rumours in the corridors of science, appoint themselves as representatives of modern thought, as persons superior in knowledge and moral virtue to any who retain a high regard for traditional values, as persons whose very duty it is to offer new ideas to the public – and who must, in order to make their wares seem novel, deride whatever is conventional. For such people, due to the positions in which they find themselves, ‘newness’, or ‘news’, and not truth, becomes the main value, although that is hardly their intention – and although what they offer is often no more new than it is true. Moreover, one might wonder whether these intellectuals are not sometimes inspired by resentment that they, knowing better what ought to be done, are paid so much less than those whose instructions and activities in fact guide practical affairs. Such literary interpreters of scientific and technological advance, of which H. G. Wells, because of the unusually high quality of his work, would be an excellent example, have done far more to spread the socialist ideal of a centrally directed economy in which each is assigned his due share than have the real scientists from whom they have cadged many of their notions. Another such example is that of the early George Orwell, who once argued that ‘anyone who uses his brain knows perfectly well that it is within the range of possibility [that] the world, potentially at least, is extremely rich’ such that we could ‘develop it as it might be developed, and we could all live like princes, supposing that we wanted to’.

I shall concentrate here not on the work of men like Wells and Orwell, but on views propounded by some of the greatest scientists. We might begin with Jacques Monod. Monod was a great figure whose scientific work I much admire, and was, essentially, the creator of modern molecular biology. His reflections on ethics, however, were of a different quality. In 1970, in a Nobel Foundation symposium concerning ‘The Place of Values in a World of Facts’, he stated：‘Scientific development has finally destroyed, reduced to absurdity, relegated to the state of nonsensical wishful thinking, the idea that ethics and values are not a matter of our free choice but are rather a matter of obligation for us’ (1970:20–21). Later that year, to re-emphasise his views, he argued the same case in a book now famous, Chance and Necessity (1970/1977). There he enjoins us, ascetically renouncing all other spiritual nourishment, to acknowledge science as the new and virtually exclusive source of truth, and to revise the foundations of ethics accordingly. The book ends like so many similar pronouncements with the idea that ‘ethics, in essence nonobjective, is forever barred from the sphere of knowledge’ (1970/77:162). The new ‘ethic of knowledge does not impose itself on man; on the contrary, it is he who imposes it upon himself’ (1970/77:164). This new ‘ethic of knowledge’ is, Monod says, ‘the only attitude which is both rational and resolutely idealistic, and on which a real socialism might be built’ (1970/77:165–66). Monod’s ideas are characteristic in that they are deeply rooted in a theory of knowledge that has attempted to develop a science of behaviour – whether called eudaimonism, utilitarianism, socialism, or whatever – on the grounds that certain sorts of behaviour better satisfy our wishes. We are advised to behave in such a way as will permit given situations to satisfy our desires, and make us happier, and such like. In other words, what is wanted is an ethics that men can deliberately follow to reach known, desired, and pre-selected aims.

Monod’s conclusions stem from his opinion that the only other possible way to account for the origin of morals – apart from ascribing them to human invention – is by animistic or anthropomorphic accounts such as are given in many religions. And it is indeed true that ‘for mankind as a whole all religions have been intertwined with the anthropomorphic view of the deity as a father, friend or potentate to whom men must do service, pray, etc.’ (M. R. Cohen, 1931:112). This aspect of religion I can as little accept as can Monod and the majority of natural scientists. It seems to me to lower something far beyond our comprehension to the level of a slightly superior manlike mind. But to reject this aspect of religion does not preclude our recognising that we may owe to these religions the preservation – admittedly for false reasons – of practices that were more important in enabling man to survive in large numbers than most of what has been accomplished through reason (see chapter nine below).

Monod is not the only biologist to argue along such lines. A statement by another great biologist and very learned scholar illustrates better than almost any other I have come across the absurdities to which supreme intelligence can be led by a misinterpretation of the ‘laws of evolution’ (see chapter one above). Joseph Needham writes that ‘the new world order of social justice and comradeship, the rational and classless state, is no wild idealistic dream, but a logical extrapolation from the whole course of evolution, having no less authority than that behind it, and therefore of all faiths the most rational’ (J. Needham, 1943:41).

I shall return to Monod, but want first to assemble a few further examples. A particularly appropriate instance that I have discussed elsewhere (1978), is John Maynard Keynes, one of the most representative intellectual leaders of a generation emancipated from traditional morals. Keynes believed that, by taking account of foreseeable effects, he could build a better world than by submitting to traditional abstract rules. Keynes used the phrase ‘conventional wisdom’ as a favourite expression of scorn, and, in a revealing autobiographical account (1938/49/72：X, 446), he told how the Cambridge circle of his younger years, most of whose members later belonged to the Bloomsbury Group, ‘entirely repudiated a personal liability on us to obey general rules’, and how they were ‘in the strict sense of the term, immoralists’. He modestly added that, at the age of fifty-five, he was too old to change and would remain an immoralist. This extraordinary man also characteristically justified some of his economic views, and his general belief in a management of the market order, on the ground that ‘in the long run we are all dead’ (i.e., it does not matter what long-range damage we do; it is the present moment alone, the short run – consisting of public opinion, demands, votes, and all the stuff and bribes of demagoguery – which counts). The slogan that ‘in the long run we are all dead’ is also a characteristic manifestation of an unwillingness to recognise that morals are concerned with effects in the long run – effects beyond our possible perception – and of a tendency to spurn the learnt discipline of the long view.

Keynes also argued against the moral tradition of the ‘virtue of saving’, refusing, along with thousands of crank economists, to admit that a reduction of the demand for consumers’ goods is generally required to make an increase of the production of capital goods (i.e., investment) possible. And this in turn led him to devote his formidable intellectual powers to develop his ‘general’ theory of economics – to which we owe the unique world-wide inflation of the third quarter of our century and the inevitable consequence of severe unemployment that has followed it (Hayek, 1972/1978).

Thus it was not philosophy alone that confused Keynes. It was also economics. Alfred Marshall, who understood the matter, seems to have failed to impress adequately upon Keynes one of the important insights that John Stuart Mill had gained in his youth：namely, that ‘the demand for commodities is not a demand for labour’. Sir Leslie Stephen (the father of Virginia Woolf, another member of the Bloomsbury group) described this doctrine in 1876 as a ‘doctrine so rarely understood, that its complete appreciation is, perhaps, the best test of an economist’ – and was ridiculed for saying so by Keynes. (See Hayek, 1970/78:15–16, 1973:25, and (on Mill and Stephen) 1941:433ff.)

Although Keynes was, in spite of himself, to contribute greatly to the weakening of freedom, he shocked his Bloomsbury friends by not sharing their general socialism; yet most of his students were socialists of one sort or other. Neither he nor these students recognised how the extended order must be based on long-run considerations.

The philosophic illusion that lay behind the views of Keynes, that there exists an indefinable attribute of ‘goodness’ – one to be discovered by every individual, which imposes on each a duty to pursue it, and whose recognition justifies contempt for and disregard of much of traditional morals (a view which through the work of G. E. Moore (1903) dominated the Bloomsbury group) – produced a characteristic enmity to the sources on which he fed. This was evident for instance also in E. M. Forster, who seriously argued that freeing mankind from the evils of ‘commercialism’ had become as urgent as had been freeing it from slavery.

Sentiments similar to those of Monod and Keynes come from a less distinguished yet still influential scientist：the psychoanalyst who became the first Secretary General of the World Health Organisation, G. B. Chisholm. Chisholm advocated no less than ‘the eradication of the concept of right and wrong’ and maintained that it was the task of the psychiatrist to free the human race from ‘the crippling burden of good and evil’ – advice which at the time received praise from high American legal authority. Here again, morality is seen – since it is not ‘scientifically’ grounded – as irrational, and its status as embodiment of accumulated cultural knowledge goes unrecognised.

Let us turn, however, to a scientist even greater than Monod or Keynes, to Albert Einstein, perhaps the greatest genius of our age. Einstein was concerned with a different yet closely related theme. Using a popular socialist slogan, he wrote that ‘production for use’ ought to replace the ‘production for profit’ of the capitalist order (1956:129).

‘Production for use’ means here the kind of work which, in the small group, is guided by anticipating for whose use the product is intended. But this sentiment fails to take into account the sorts of considerations advanced in the foregoing chapters, and to be argued again in the following：only the differences between expected prices for different commodities and services and their costs, in the self-generating order of the market, tell the individual how best to contribute to the pool from which we all draw in proportion to our contribution. Einstein appears to have been unaware that only calculation and distribution in terms of market prices make it possible to utilise our discoverable resources intensively, to guide production to serve ends lying beyond the range of the producer’s perception, and to enable the individual to participate usefully in productive exchange (first, by serving people, mostly unknown to him, to the gratification of whose needs he can nonetheless effectively contribute; and second, by himself being supplied as well as he is only because people who know nothing about his existence are induced, also by market signals, to provide for his needs：see the previous chapter). In following such sentiments Einstein shows his lack of comprehension of, or real interest in, the actual processes by which human efforts are coordinated.

Einstein’s biographer reports that Einstein regarded it as obvious that ‘human reason must be capable of finding a method of distribution which would work as effectively as that of production’ (Clark, 1971:559) – a description that reminds one of the philosopher Bertrand Russell’s claim that a society could not be regarded as ‘fully scientific’ unless ‘it has been created deliberately with a certain structure to fulfil certain purposes’ (1931:203). Such demands, particularly in Einstein’s mouth, seemed so superficially plausible that even a sensible philosopher, twitting Einstein for talking beyond his competence in some of his popular writings, stated approvingly that ‘Einstein is clearly aware that the present economic crisis is due to our system of production for profit rather than for use, to the fact that our tremendous increase of productive power is not actually followed by a corresponding increase in the purchasing power of the great masses’ (M. R. Cohen, 1931:119).

We also find Einstein repeating (in the essay cited) familiar phrases of socialist agitation about the ‘economic anarchy of capitalist society’ in which ‘the payment of the workers is not determined by the value of the product’, while ‘a planned economy . . . would distribute the work to be done among all those able to work’, and such like.

A similar but more guarded view appears in an essay by Einstein’s collaborator Max Born (1968：chap.5). While Born evidently realised that our extended order no longer gratified primitive instincts, he too failed to examine closely the structures that create and maintain this order, or to see that our instinctual morals have over the past five thousand years or more gradually been replaced or restrained. Thus, although perceiving that ‘science and technology have destroyed the ethical basis of civilisation, perhaps irreparably’, he imagines that they have done so by the facts they have uncovered rather than by their having systematically discredited beliefs that fail to satisfy certain ‘standards of acceptability’ demanded by constructivist rationalism (see below). While admitting that ‘no one has yet devised a means of keeping society together without traditional ethical principles’, Born yet hopes that these can be replaced ‘by means of the traditional method used in science’. He too fails to see that what lies between instinct and reason cannot be replaced by ‘the traditional method used in science’.

My examples are taken from statements of important twentieth-century figures; I have not included countless other such figures, such as R. A. Millikan, Arthur Eddington, F. Soddy, W. Ostwald, E. Solvay, J. D. Bernal, all of whom talked much nonsense on economic matters. Indeed, one could cite hundreds of similar statements by scientists and philosophers of comparable renown – both from centuries past and from the present time. But we can, I believe, learn more by taking a closer look at these particular contemporary examples – and at what lies behind them – than simply by piling up citations and examples. Perhaps the first thing to notice is that, although far from identical, these examples have a certain family resemblance.





