‘Social Justice’ and ‘Social Rights’

Much the worst use of ‘social’, one that wholly destroys the meaning of any word it qualifies, is in the almost universally used phrase ‘social justice’. Though I have dealt with this particular matter already at some length, particularly in the second volume on The Mirage of Social Justice in my Law, Legislation and Liberty, I must at least briefly state the point again here, since it plays such an important part in arguments for and against socialism. The phrase ‘social justice’ is, as a distinguished man more courageous than I bluntly expressed it long ago, simply ‘a semantic fraud from the same stable as People’s Democracy’ (Curran, 1958:8). The alarming extent to which the term seems already to have perverted the thinking of the younger generation is shown by a recent Oxford doctor’s thesis on Social Justice (Miller, 1976), in which the traditional conception of justice is referred to by the extraordinary remark that ‘there appears to be a category of private justice’.

I have seen it suggested that ‘social’ applies to everything that reduces or removes differences of income. But why call such action ‘social’? Perhaps because it is a method of securing majorities, that is, votes in addition to those one expects to get for other reasons? This does seem to be so, but it also means of course that every exhortation to us to be ‘social’ is an appeal for a further step towards the ‘social justice’ of socialism. Thus use of the term ‘social’ becomes virtually equivalent to the call for ‘distributive justice’. This is, however, irreconcilable with a competitive market order, and with growth or even maintenance of population and of wealth. Thus people have come, through such errors, to call ‘social’ what is the main obstacle to the very maintenance of ‘society’. ‘Social’ should really be called ‘anti-social’.

It is probably true that men would be happier about their economic conditions if they felt that the relative positions of individuals were just. Yet the whole idea behind distributive justice – that each individual ought to receive what he morally deserves – is meaningless in the extended order of human cooperation (or the catallaxy), because the available product (its size, and even its existence) depends on what is in one sense a morally indifferent way of allocating its parts. For reasons already explored, moral desert cannot be determined objectively, and in any case the adaptation of the larger whole to facts yet to be discovered requires that we accept that ‘success is based on results, not on motivation’ (Alchian, 1950:213). Any extended system of cooperation must adapt itself constantly to changes in its natural environment (which include the life, health and strength of its members); the demand that only changes with just effect should occur is ridiculous. It is nearly as ridiculous as the belief that deliberate organisation of response to such changes can be just. Mankind could neither have reached nor could now maintain its present numbers without an inequality that is neither determined by, nor reconcilable with, any deliberate moral judgements. Effort of course will improve individual chances, but it alone cannot secure results. The envy of those who have tried just as hard, although fully understandable, works against the common interest. Thus, if the common interest is really our interest, we must not give in to this very human instinctual trait, but instead allow the market process to determine the reward. Nobody can ascertain, save through the market, the size of an individual’s contribution to the overall product, nor can it otherwise be determined how much remuneration must be tendered to someone to enable him to choose the activity which will add most to the flow of goods and services offered at large. Of course if the latter should be considered morally good, then the market turns out to produce a supremely moral result.

Mankind is split into two hostile groups by promises that have no realisable content. The sources of this conflict cannot be dissipated by compromise, for every concession to factual error merely creates more unrealisable expectations. Yet, an anti-capitalist ethic continues to develop on the basis of errors by people who condemn the wealth-generating institutions to which they themselves owe their existence. Pretending to be lovers of freedom, they condemn several property, contract, competition, advertising, profit, and even money itself. Imagining that their reason can tell them how to arrange human efforts to serve their innate wishes better, they themselves pose a grave threat to civilisation.





