Life Has No Purpose But Itself

Life exists only so long as it provides for its own continuance. Whatever men live for, today most live only because of the market order. We have become civilised by the increase of our numbers just as civilisation made that increase possible：we can be few and savage, or many and civilised. If reduced to its population of ten thousand years ago, mankind could not preserve civilisation. Indeed, even if knowledge already gained were preserved in libraries, men could make little use of it without numbers sufficient to fill the jobs demanded for extensive specialisation and division of labour. All knowledge available in books would not save ten thousand people spared somewhere after an atomic holocaust from having to return to a life of hunters and gatherers, although it would probably shorten the total amount of time that humankind would have to remain in such a condition.

When people began to build better than they knew because they began to subordinate concrete common goals to abstract rules that enabled them to participate in a process of orderly collaboration that nobody could survey or arrange, and which no one could have predicted, they created situations unintended and often undesired. We may not like the fact that our rules were shaped mainly by their suitability for increasing our numbers, but we have little choice in the matter now (if we ever did), for we must deal with a situation that has already been brought into being. So many people already exist; and only a market economy can keep the bulk of them alive. Because of the rapid transfer of information, men everywhere now know what high standards of living are possible. Most of those who live in some more thinly settled places can hope to reach such standards only by multiplying and settling their regions more densely – so increasing even further the numbers that can be kept alive by a market economy.

Since we can preserve and secure even our present numbers only by adhering to the same general kinds of principles, it is our duty – unless we truly wish to condemn millions to starvation – to resist the claims of creeds that tend to destroy the basic principles of these morals, such as the institution of several property.

In any case, our desires and wishes are largely irrelevant. Whether we desire further increases of production and population or not, we must – merely to maintain existing numbers and wealth, and to protect them as best we can against calamity – strive after what, under favourable conditions, will continue to lead, at least for some time, and in many places, to further increases.

While I have not intended to evaluate the issue whether, if we had the choice, we would want to choose civilisation, examining issues of population raises two relevant points. First, the spectre of a population explosion that would make most lives miserable appears, as we have seen, to be unfounded. Once this danger is removed, if one considers the realities of ‘bourgeois’ life – but not utopian demands for a life free of all conflict, pain, lack of fulfilment, and, indeed, morality – one might think the pleasures and stimulations of civilisation not a bad bargain for those who do not yet enjoy them. But the question of whether we are better off civilised than not is probably unanswerable in any final way through such speculation. The second point is that the only thing close to an objective assessment of the issue is to see what people do when they are given the choice – as we are not. The readiness with which ordinary people of the Third World – as opposed to Western-educated intellectuals – appear to embrace the opportunities offered them by the extended order, even if it means inhabiting for a time shanty towns at the periphery, complements evidence regarding the reactions of European peasants to the introduction of urban capitalism, indicating that people will usually choose civilisation if they have the choice.





