A. ‘NATURAL’ VS ‘ARTIFICIAL’

Current scientific and philosophical usage is so deeply influenced by the Aristotelian tradition, which knows nothing of evolution, that existing dichotomies and contrasts not only usually fail to capture correctly the processes underlying the problems and conflicts discussed in chapter one, but actually hinder understanding of those problems and conflicts themselves. In this section I shall review some of these difficulties in classification, in the hope that some familiarity with the obstacles to understanding may in fact further understanding.

We may as well begin with the word ‘natural’, the source of much controversy and many misunderstandings. The original meaning of the Latin root of ‘natural’, as well as the Greek root of its equivalent ‘physical’, derive from verbs describing kinds of growth (nascor and phyo respectively; see Kerferd, 1981:111–150), so that it would be legitimate to describe as ‘natural’ anything that has grown spontaneously and not been deliberately designed by a mind. In this sense our traditional, spontaneously evolved morals are perfectly natural rather than artificial, and it would seem fitting to call such traditional rules ‘natural law’.

But usage does not readily permit the understanding of natural law that I have just sketched. Rather, it tends to confine the word ‘natural’ to innate propensities or instincts that (as we saw in chapter one) often conflict with evolved rules of conduct. If such innate responses alone are described as ‘natural’, and if – to make matters worse – only what is necessary to preserve an existing state of affairs, particularly the order of the small group or immediate community, is described as ‘good’, we have to designate as both ‘unnatural’ and ‘bad’ even the first steps taken towards observing rules and thereby adapting to changing conditions – that is, the first steps towards civilisation.

Now if ‘natural’ must be used to mean innate or instinctual, and ‘artificial’ to mean the product of design, the results of cultural evolution (such as traditional rules) are clearly neither one nor the other – and thus are not only ‘between instinct and reason’, but also of course between ‘natural’ (i.e., instinctual) and ‘artificial’ (i.e., the product of reasonable design). The exclusive dichotomy of ‘natural’ and ‘artificial’, as well as the similar and related one of ‘passion’ and ‘reason’ – which, being exclusive, does not permit any area between these terms – has thus contributed greatly to the neglect and misunderstanding of the crucial exosomatic process of cultural evolution which produced the traditions that determined the growth of civilisation. In effect, these dichotomies define this area, and these processes, out of existence.

Yet if we go beyond these crude dichotomies, we see that the true opposite to passion is not reason but traditional morals. The evolution of a tradition of rules of conduct – standing between the processes of the evolution of instinct and those of reason – is a distinct process which it is quite mistaken to regard as a product of reason. Such traditional rules have indeed grown naturally in the course of evolution.

Growth is not an exclusive property of biological organisms. From the proverbial snowball to the deposits of wind or the formation of crystals – or waterborne sand, the rising of mountains and the formation of complex molecules – nature is full of examples of increase of size or structure. When we consider the emergence of structures of interrelations among organisms, we find that it is also perfectly correct, etymologically and logically, to use the word ‘growth’ to describe them; and this is how I mean the word：namely, to designate a process occurring in a self-maintaining structure.

Thus to continue to contrast cultural with natural evolution leads back into the trap mentioned – the exclusive dichotomy between ‘artificial’ development guided by conscious design, and what is assumed to be ‘natural’ because it exhibits unchanging instinctual characteristics. Such interpretations of ‘natural’ easily force one in the direction of constructivist rationalism. Though constructivist interpretations are no doubt superior to organismic ‘explanations’ (now generally rejected as empty) that merely substitute one unexplained process for another, we should recognise that there are two distinct kinds of evolutionary process – both of which are perfectly natural processes. Cultural evolution, although a distinct process, remains in important respects more similar to genetic or biological evolution than to developments guided by reason or foreknowledge of the effects of decisions.

The similarity of the order of human interaction to that of biological organisms has of course often been noticed. But so long as we were unable to explain how the orderly structures of nature were formed, as long as we lacked an account of evolutionary selection, the analogies perceived were of limited help. With evolutionary selection, however, we are now supplied with a key to a general understanding of the formation of order in life, mind and interpersonal relations.

Incidentally, some of those orders, like that of the mind, may be capable of forming orders of a lower degree, yet are themselves not the products of orders of a higher level. This teaches us to recognise our limited power of explaining or designing an order belonging to a lower stage of the hierarchy of orders, as well as our inability to explain or design one of a higher order.

Having stated the general problem that interferes with clear usage of these traditional terms, we may as well indicate briefly, taking David Hume as an example, how even the thought of one of the most important thinkers in our tradition has been plagued by misunderstandings arising from such false dichotomies. Hume is a particularly good example since he unfortunately chose for the moral traditions that I would really prefer to call natural the term ‘artificial’ (probably borrowing from the common-law writers’ expression ‘artificial reason’). Ironically, this led to his being regarded as the founder of utilitarianism, despite his having stressed that ‘though the rules of justice be artificial they are not arbitrary’, and that therefore it is even not ‘improper to call them laws of nature’ (1739/1886:II, 258). He endeavoured to safeguard himself against constructivistic misinterpretations by explaining that he ‘only suppose[d] those reflections to be formed at once, which in fact arise insensibly and by degrees’ (1739/1886:II, 274). (Hume made use here of the device which Scottish moral philosophers called ‘conjectural history’ (Stewart, 1829:VII, 90, and Medick, 1973:134–176) – a device later often called ‘rational reconstruction’ – in a manner that may mislead and which his younger contemporary Adam Ferguson learnt systematically to avoid). As these passages suggest, Hume came close to an evolutionary interpretation, even perceiving that ‘no form can persist unless it possesses those powers and organs necessary for its subsistence：some new order or economy must be tried and so on, without intermission; till at last some order which can support and maintain itself, is fallen upon’; and that man cannot ‘pretend to an exemption from the lot of all living animals [because the] perpetual war among all living creatures’ must go on (1779/1886:II, 429, 436). As has been well said, he practically recognised that ‘there is a third category between natural and artificial which shares certain characteristics with both’ (Haakonssen, 1981:24).

Yet the temptation to try to explain the function of self-organising structures by showing how such a structure might have been formed by a creating mind is great; and it is thus understandable that some of Hume’s followers interpreted his term ‘artificial’ in this way, building on it a utilitarian theory of ethics according to which man consciously chooses his morals for their recognised utility. This may seem a curious view to ascribe to someone who had stressed that ‘the rules of morality are not the conclusions of reason’ (1739/1886:II, 235), but it was a misinterpretation that came naturally to a Cartesian rationalist such as C. V. Helvetius, from whom Jeremy Bentham admittedly derived his own constructions (see Everett, 1931:110).

Though in Hume, and also in the works of Bernard Mandeville, we can watch the gradual emergence of the twin concepts of the formations of spontaneous orders and of selective evolution (see Hayek, 1967/78:250, 1963/67:106–121 and 1967/78a:249–266), it was Adam Smith and Adam Ferguson who first made systematic use of this approach. Smith’s work marks the breakthrough of an evolutionary approach which has progressively displaced the stationary Aristotelian view. The nineteenth-century enthusiast who claimed that the Wealth of Nations was in importance second only to the Bible has often been ridiculed; but he may not have exaggerated so much. Even Aristotle’s disciple Thomas Aquinas could not conceal from himself that multae utilitates impedirentur si omnia peccata districte prohiberentur – that much that is useful would be prevented if all sins were strictly prohibited (Summa Theologica, II, ii, q. 78 i).

While Smith has been recognised by several writers as the originator of cybernetics (Emmet, 1958:90, Hardin, 1961:54), recent examinations of Charles Darwin’s notebooks (Vorzimmer, 1977; Gruber, 1974) suggest that his reading of Adam Smith in the crucial year 1838 led Darwin to his decisive breakthrough.

Thus from the Scottish moral philosophers of the eighteenth century stem the chief impulses towards a theory of evolution, the variety of disciplines now known as cybernetics, general systems theory, synergetics, autopoiesis, etc., as well as the understanding of the superior self-ordering power of the market system, and of the evolution also of language, morals, and law (Ullman-Margalit, 1978, and Keller, 1982).

Adam Smith nevertheless remains the butt of jokes, even among economists, many of whom have not yet discovered that the analysis of self-ordering processes must be the chief task of any science of the market order. Another great economist, Carl Menger, a little more than a hundred years after Adam Smith, clearly perceived that ‘this genetic element is inseparable from the conception of theoretical science’ (Menger, 1883/1933:II, 183, and cf. his earlier use of the term ‘genetic’ in Menger, 1871/1934:I, 250). It was largely through such endeavors to understand the formation of human interaction through evolution and spontaneous formation of order that these approaches have become the main tools for dealing with such complex phenomena for the explanation of which ‘mechanical laws’ of one-directional causation are no longer adequate (see Appendix B).

In recent years the spreading of this evolutionary approach has so much affected the development of research that a report of the 1980 meeting of the Gesellschaft Deutscher Naturforscher und Ärzte could say that ‘for modern science of nature a world of things and phenomena has become a world of structures and orders’.

Such recent advances in natural science have shown how right the American scholar Simon N. Patten was when, nearly ninety years ago, he wrote that ‘just as Adam Smith was the last of the moralists and the first of the economists, so Darwin was the last of the economists and the first of the biologists’ (1899, XXIII). Smith proves to have been even more than that：the paradigm he provided has since become a tool of great power in many branches of scientific effort.

Nothing better illustrates the humanistic derivation of the concept of evolution than that biology had to borrow its vocabulary from the humanities. The term ‘genetic’ that has now become perhaps the key technical term for the theory of biological evolution was apparently first used in its German form (genetisch) (Schulze, 1913:I, 242), in the writings of J. G. Herder (1767), Friedrich Schiller (1793) and C. M. Wieland (1800), long before Thomas Carlyle introduced it into English. It was used particularly in linguistics after Sir William Jones had in 1787 discovered the common descent of the Indo-European languages; and by the time that this had been elaborated in 1816 by Franz Bopp, the conception of cultural evolution had become a commonplace. We find the term used again in 1836 by Wilhelm von Humboldt (1977:III, 389 and 418), who in the same work also argued that ‘if one conceived of the formation of language, as is most natural, as successsive, it becomes necessary to ascribe to it, as to all origin in nature, a system of evolution’ (with thanks to Professor R. Keller, Düsseldorf, for this reference). Was it an accident that Humboldt was also a great advocate of individual freedom? And after the publication of Charles Darwin’s work we find lawyers and linguists (aware of their kinship already in ancient Rome (Stein, 1966：chapter 3)), protest that they had been ‘Darwinians before Darwin’ (Hayek, 1973:153). It was not until after William Bateson’s Problems of Genetics (1913) that ‘genetics’ rapidly became the distinctive name for biological evolution. Here we shall adhere to its modern use, established by Bateson, for biological inheritance through ‘genes’, to distinguish it from cultural inheritance through learning – which does not mean that the distinction can always be carried through precisely. The two forms of inheritance frequently interact, particularly by genetic inheritance determining what can or cannot be inherited by learning (i.e., culturally).





