Natural Selection from Among the Guardians of Tradition

In closing this work, I would like to make a few informal remarks – they are intended as no more than that – about the connection between the argument of this book and the role of religious belief. These remarks may be unpalatable to some intellectuals because they suggest that, in their own long-standing conflict with religion, they were partly mistaken – and very much lacking in appreciation.

This book has shown mankind as torn between two states of being. On one hand are the kinds of attitudes and emotions appropriate to behaviour in the small groups wherein mankind lived for more than a hundred thousand years, wherein known fellows learnt to serve one another, and to pursue common aims. Curiously, these archaic, more primitive attitudes and emotions are now supported by much of rationalism, and by the empiricism, hedonism, and socialism associated with it. On the other hand there is the more recent development in cultural evolution wherein we no longer chiefly serve known fellows or pursue common ends, but where institutions, moral systems, and traditions have evolved that have produced and now keep alive many times more people than existed before the dawn of civilisation, people who are engaged, largely peacefully though competitively, in pursuing thousands of different ends of their own choosing in collaboration with thousands of persons whom they will never know.

How can such a thing have happened? How could traditions which people do not like or understand, whose effects they usually do not appreciate and can neither see nor foresee, and which they are still ardently combating, continue to have been passed on from generation to generation?

Part of the answer is of course the one with which we began, the evolution of moral orders through group selection：groups that behave in these ways simply survive and increase. But this cannot be the whole story. If not from an understanding of their beneficial effect in creating an as-yet unimaginable extended order of cooperation, whence did such rules of conduct originate? More important, how were they preserved against the strong opposition of instinct and, more recently, from the assaults of reason? Here we come to religion.

Custom and tradition, both non-rational adaptations to the environment, are more likely to guide group selection when supported by totem and taboo, or magical or religious beliefs – beliefs that themselves grew from the tendency to interpret any order men encountered in an animistic manner. At first the main function of such restraints on individual action may have been to serve as signs of recognition among members of the group. Later the belief in spirits that punished transgressors led such restraints to be preserved. ‘The spirits are in general conceived as guardians of tradition. . . . Our ancestors live now as spirits in the other world. . . . They become angry and make things bad if we do not obey custom’ (Malinowski, 1936:25).

But this is not yet sufficient for any real selection to occur, for such beliefs and the rites and ceremonies associated with them must also work on another level. Common practices must have a chance to produce their beneficial effects on a group on a progressive scale before selection by evolution can become effective. Meanwhile, how are they transmitted from generation to generation? Unlike genetic properties, cultural properties are not transmitted automatically. Transmission and non-transmission from generation to generation are as much positive or negative contributions to a stock of traditions as are any contributions by individuals. Many generations will therefore probably be required to ensure that any particular such traditions are indeed continued, and that they do indeed eventually spread. Mythical beliefs of some sort may be needed to bring this about, especially where rules of conduct conflicting with instinct are concerned. A merely utilitarian or even functionalist explanation of the different rites or ceremonies will be insufficient, and even implausible.

We owe it partly to mystical and religious beliefs, and, I believe, particularly to the main monotheistic ones, that beneficial traditions have been preserved and transmitted at least long enough to enable those groups following them to grow, and to have the opportunity to spread by natural or cultural selection. This means that, like it or not, we owe the persistence of certain practices, and the civilisation that resulted from them, in part to support from beliefs which are not true – or verifiable or testable – in the same sense as are scientific statements, and which are certainly not the result of rational argumentation. I sometimes think that it might be appropriate to call at least some of them, at least as a gesture of appreciation, ‘symbolic truths’, since they did help their adherents to ‘be fruitful and multiply and replenish the earth and subdue it’ (Genesis 1:28). Even those among us, like myself, who are not prepared to accept the anthropomorphic conception of a personal divinity ought to admit that the premature loss of what we regard as nonfactual beliefs would have deprived mankind of a powerful support in the long development of the extended order that we now enjoy, and that even now the loss of these beliefs, whether true or false, creates great difficulties.

In any case, the religious view that morals were determined by processes incomprehensible to us may at any rate be truer (even if not exactly in the way intended) than the rationalist delusion that man, by exercising his intelligence, invented morals that gave him the power to achieve more than he could ever foresee. If we bear these things in mind, we can better understand and appreciate those clerics who are said to have become somewhat sceptical of the validity of some of their teachings and who yet continued to teach them because they feared that a loss of faith would lead to a decline of morals. No doubt they were right; and even an agnostic ought to concede that we owe our morals, and the tradition that has provided not only our civilisation but our very lives, to the acceptance of such scientifically unacceptable factual claims.

The undoubted historical connection between religion and the values that have shaped and furthered our civilisation, such as the family and several property, does not of course mean that there is any intrinsic connection between religion as such and such values. Among the founders of religions over the last two thousand years, many opposed property and the family. But the only religions that have survived are those which support property and the family. Thus the outlook for communism, which is both anti-property and anti-family (and also anti-religion), is not promising. For it is, I believe, itself a religion which had its time, and which is now declining rapidly. In communist and socialist countries we are watching how the natural selection of religious beliefs disposes of the maladapted.

The decline of communism of which I speak is, of course, occurring mainly where it has actually been implemented – and has therefore been allowed to disappoint utopian hopes. It lives on, however, in the hearts of those who have not experienced its real effects：in Western intellectuals and among the poor on the periphery of the extended order, i.e., in the Third World. Among the former, there appears to be some growing sense that rationalism of the type criticised here is a false god; but the need for a god of some sort persists, and is met partly by such means as returning to a curious version of Hegelian dialectic which allows the illusion of rationality to coexist with a system of belief closed to criticism by unquestioned commitment to a ‘humanist totality’ (which, in fact, is itself supremely rationalistic in just the constructivist sense I have criticised). As Herbert Marcuse put it, ‘Real freedom for individual existence (and not merely in the liberalist sense) is possible only in a specifically structured polis, a ‘rationally’ organized society’ (quoted in Jay, 1973:119. To see what this ‘rationality’ means, see ibid., 49, 57, 60, 64, 81, 125, et passim). In the latter, ‘liberation theology’ may fuse with nationalism to produce a powerful new religion with disastrous consequences for people already in dire economic straits (see O’Brien, 1986).

How would religion have sustained beneficial customs? Customs whose beneficial effects were unperceivable by those practising them were likely to be preserved long enough to increase their selective advantage only when supported by some other strong beliefs; and some powerful supernatural or magic faiths were readily available to perform this role. As an order of human interaction became more extended, and still more threatening to instinctual claims, it might for a time become quite dependent on the continuing influence of some such religious beliefs – false reasons influencing men to do what was required to maintain the structure enabling them to nourish their enlarging numbers (see Appendix G).

But just as the very creation of the extended order was never intended, similarly there is no reason to suppose that the support derived from religion usually was deliberately cultivated, or that there was often anything ‘conspiratorial’ about all this. It is naive – particularly in light of our argument that we cannot observe the effects of our morals – to imagine some wise elite coolly calculating the effects of various morals, selecting among them, and conspiring to persuade the masses by Platonic ‘noble lies’ to swallow an ‘opium of the people’ and thus to obey what advanced the interests of their rulers. No doubt choice among particular versions of basic religious beliefs was often decided by expedient decisions of secular rulers. Moreover, religious support was, from time to time, deliberately, sometimes even cynically, enlisted by secular rulers; but frequently these would have concerned momentary disputes that hardly counted for much over long evolutionary periods – periods wherein the question whether the favoured rule contributed to the increase of the community was more decisive than any question about what particular ruling clique may have coddled it during some particular period.

Some questions of language may also arise in describing and evaluating such developments. Ordinary language is inadequate to make the necessary distinctions sufficiently precise, especially where the concept of knowledge is concerned. For instance, is knowledge involved when a person has the habit of behaving in a manner that, without his knowing it, increases the likelihood that not only he and his family but also many others unknown to him will survive – particularly if he has preserved this habit for altogether different and indeed quite inaccurate grounds? Obviously what guided him successfully is not what is generally meant by rational knowledge. Nor is it helpful to describe such acquired practices as ‘emotive’ since they clearly are not always guided by what may legitimately be called emotions either, even though certain factors, such as fear of disapproval or punishment (whether human or divine), may often support or preserve particular habits. In many if not most cases, those who won through were those who stuck to ‘blind habit’ or learnt through religious teaching such things as that ‘honesty is the best policy’, thereby beating cleverer fellows who had ‘reasoned’ otherwise. As strategies for survival, counterparts of both rigidity and flexibility have played important roles in biological evolution; and morals that took the form of rigid rules may sometimes have been more effective than more flexible rules whose adherents attempted to steer their practice, and alter their course, according to particular facts and foreseeable consequences – and thus by something that it would be easier to call knowledge.

So far as I personally am concerned I had better state that I feel as little entitled to assert as to deny the existence of what others call God, for I must admit that I just do not know what this word is supposed to mean. I certainly reject every anthropomorphic, personal, or animistic interpretation of the term, interpretations through which many people succeed in giving it a meaning. The conception of a man-like or mindlike acting being appears to me rather the product of an arrogant overestimation of the capacities of a man-like mind. I cannot attach meaning to words that in the structure of my own thinking, or in my picture of the world, have no place that would give them meaning. It would thus be dishonest of me were I to use such words as if they expressed any belief that I hold.

I long hesitated whether to insert this personal note here, but ultimately decided to do so because support by a professed agnostic may help religious people more unhesitatingly to pursue those conclusions that we do share. Perhaps what many people mean in speaking of God is just a personification of that tradition of morals or values that keeps their community alive. The source of order that religion ascribes to a human-like divinity – the map or guide that will show a part successfully how to move within the whole – we now learn to see to be not outside the physical world but one of its characteristics, one far too complex for any of its parts possibly to form an ‘image’ or ‘picture’ of it. Thus religious prohibitions against idolatry, against the making of such images, are well taken. Yet perhaps most people can conceive of abstract tradition only as a personal Will. If so, will they not be inclined to find this will in ‘society’ in an age in which more overt supernaturalisms are ruled out as superstitions?

On that question may rest the survival of our civilisation.





