The Philosopher’s Blindness

How little the wealth of the leading Greek trading centers, especially at Athens and later at Corinth, was the result of deliberate governmental policy, and how little the true source of this prosperity was understood, is perhaps best illustrated by Aristotle’s utter incomprehension of the advanced market order in which he lived. Although he is sometimes cited as the first economist, what he discussed as oikonomia was exclusively the running of a household or at most of an individual enterprise such as a farm. For the acquisitive efforts of the market, the study of which he called chrematistika, he had only scorn. Although the lives of the Athenians of his day depended on grain trade with distant countries, his ideal order remained one that was autarkos, self-sufficient. Although also acclaimed as a biologist, Aristotle lacked any perception of two crucial aspects of the formation of any complex structure, namely, evolution and the self-formation of order. As Ernst Mayr (1982:306) puts it：‘The idea that the universe could have developed from an original chaos, or that higher organisms could have evolved from lower ones, was totally alien to Aristotle’s thought. To repeat, Aristotle was opposed to evolution of any kind.’ He seems not to have noticed the sense of ‘nature’ (or physis) as describing the process of growth (see Appendix A), and also seems to have been unfamiliar with several distinctions among self-forming orders that had been known to the pre-Socratic philosophers, such as that between a spontaneously grown kosmos and a deliberately arranged order as that of an army, which earlier thinkers had called a taxis (Hayek, 1973:37). For Aristotle, all order of human activities was taxis, the result of deliberate organisation of individual action by an ordering mind. As we saw earlier (chapter one), he expressly stated that order could be achieved only in a place small enough for everyone to hear the herald’s cry, a place which could be easily surveyed (eusynoptos, Politeia：1326b and 1327a). ‘An excessively large number’, he declared (1326a), ‘cannot participate in order’.

To Aristotle, only the known needs of an existing population provided a natural or legitimate justification for economic effort. Mankind, and even nature, he treated as if they had always existed in their present form. This static view left no room for a conception of evolution, and prevented him from even asking how existing institutions had arisen. That most existing communities, and certainly the greater number of his fellow Athenians, could not have come into existence had their forefathers remained content to satisfy their known present needs, appears never to have occurred to him. The experimental process of adaptation to unforeseen change by the observation of abstract rules which, when successful, could lead to an increase of numbers and the formation of regular patterns, was alien to him. Thus Aristotle also set the pattern for a common approach to ethical theory, one under which clues to the usefulness of rules that are offered by history go unrecognised, one under which no thought of analysing usefulness from an economic standpoint ever occurs – since the theorist is oblivious to the problems whose solutions might be embodied in such rules.

Since only actions aiming at perceived benefit to others were, to Aristotle’s mind, morally approved, actions solely for personal gain must be bad. That commercial considerations may not have affected the daily activities of most people does not mean however that over any prolonged period their very lives did not depend on the functioning of a trade that enabled them to buy essentials. That production for gain which Aristotle denounced as unnatural had – long before his time – already become the foundation of an extended order far transcending the known needs of other persons.

As we now know, in the evolution of the structure of human activities, profitability works as a signal that guides selection towards what makes man more fruitful; only what is more profitable will, as a rule, nourish more people, for it sacrifices less than it adds. So much was at least sensed by some Greeks prior to Aristotle. Indeed, in the fifth century – that is, before Aristotle – the first truly great historian began his history of the Peloponnesian War by reflecting how early people ‘without commerce, without freedom of communication either by land or sea, cultivating no more of their territory than the exigencies of life required, could never rise above nomadic life’ and consequently ‘neither built large cities nor attained to any other form of greatness’ (Thucydides, Crawly translation, I, 1, 2). But Aristotle ignored this insight.

Had the Athenians followed Aristotle’s counsel – counsel blind both to economics and to evolution – their city would rapidly have shrunk into a village, for his view of human ordering led him to an ethics appropriate only to, if anywhere at all, a stationary state. Nonetheless his doctrines came to dominate philosophical and religious thinking for the next two thousand years – despite the fact that much of that same philosophical and religious thinking took place within a highly dynamic, rapidly extending, order.

The repercussions of Aristotle’s systematisation of the morals of the micro-order were amplified with the adoption of Aristotelian teaching in the thirteenth century by Thomas Aquinas, which later led to the proclamation of Aristotelian ethics as virtually the official teaching of the Roman Catholic Church. The anti-commercial attitude of the mediaeval and early modern Church, condemnation of interest as usury, its teaching of the just price, and its contemptuous treatment of gain is Aristotelian through and through.

By the eighteenth century, of course, Aristotle’s influence in such matters (as in others) was weakening. David Hume saw that the market made it possible ‘to do a service to another without bearing him a real kindness’ (1739/1886:II, 289) or even knowing him; or to act to the ‘advantage of the public, though it be not intended for that purpose by another’ (1739/1886:II, 296), by an order in which it was in the ‘interest, even of bad men to act for the public good’. With such insights, the conception of a self-organising structure began to dawn upon mankind, and has since become the basis of our understanding of all those complex orders which had, until then, appeared as miracles that could be brought about only by some super-human version of what man knew as his own mind. Now it gradually became understood how the market enabled each, within set limits, to use his own individual knowledge for his own individual purposes while being ignorant of most of the order into which he had to fit his actions.

Notwithstanding, and indeed wholly neglecting, the existence of this great advance, a view that is still permeated by Aristotelian thought, a naive and childlike animistic view of the world (Piaget, 1929:359), has come to dominate social theory and is the foundation of socialist thought.





