The Weasel Word ‘Social’

The noun ‘society’, misleading as it is, is relatively innocuous compared with the adjective ‘social’, which has probably become the most confusing expression in our entire moral and political vocabulary. This has happened only during the past hundred years, during which time its modern usages, and its power and influence, have expanded rapidly from Bismarckian Germany to cover the whole world. The confusion that it spreads, within the very area wherein it is most used, is partly due to its describing not only phenomena produced by various modes of cooperation among men, such as in a ‘society’, but also the kinds of actions that promote and serve such orders. From this latter usage it has increasingly been turned into an exhortation, a sort of guide-word for rationalist morals intended to displace traditional morals, and now increasingly supplants the word ‘good’ as a designation of what is morally right. As a result of this ‘distinctly dichotomous’ character, as Webster’s New Dictionary of Synonyms appropriately puts it, factual and normative meanings of the word ‘social’ constantly alternate, and what at first seems a description imperceptibly turns into a prescription.

On this particular matter, German usage influenced the American language more than English; for by the eighteen-eighties a group of German scholars known as the historical or ethical school of economic research had increasingly substituted the term ‘social policy’ for the term ‘political economy’ to designate the study of human interaction. One of the few not to be swept away by this new fashion, Leopold von Wiese, later remarked that only those who were young in the ‘social age’ – in the decades immediately before the Great War – can appreciate how strong at that time was the inclination to regard the ‘social’ sphere as a surrogate for religion. One of the most dramatic manifestations of this was the appearance of the so-called social pastors. But ‘to be “social”’, Wiese insists, ‘is not the same as being good or righteous or “righteous in the eyes of God”’ (1917). To some of Wiese’s students we owe instructive historical studies on the spreading of the term ‘social’ (see my references in 1976:180).

The extraordinary variety of uses to which the word ‘social’ has since been put in English is brought home vividly when in the Fontana Dictionary of Modern Thought (1977), cited earlier in another context, is found, appropriately preceded by ‘Soap Opera’, a series of no less than thirty-five combinations of ‘social’ with some noun or other, from ‘Social Action’ to ‘Social Wholes’. In a similar effort, R. Williams’s Key Words (1976), the author, although generally referring the reader, with the conventional ‘q.v.’, to corresponding entries, departed from this practice with regard to ‘social’. Apparently it would have been impractical for him to follow his policy here, and he simply had to abandon it. These examples led me for a while to note down all occurrences of ‘social’ that I encountered, thus producing the following instructive list of over one hundred and sixty nouns qualified by the adjective ‘social’:

accounting

action

adjustment



administration

affairs

agreement



age

animal

appeal



awareness

behaviour

being



body

causation

character



circle

climber

compact



composition

comprehension

concern



conception

conflict

conscience



consciousness

consideration

construction



contract

control

credit



cripples

critic (-que)

crusader



decision

demand

democracy



description

development

dimension



discrimation

disease

disposition



distance

duty

economy



end

entity

environment



epistemology

ethics

etiquette



event

evil

fact



factors

fascism

force



framework

function

gathering



geography

goal

good



graces

group

harmony



health

history

ideal



implication

inadequacy

independence



inferiority

institution

insurance



intercourse

justice

knowledge



laws

leader

life



market economy

medicine

migration



mind

morality

morals



needs

obligation

opportunity



order

organism

orientation



outcast

ownership

partner



passion

peace

pension



person

philosophy

pleasure



point of view

policy

position



power

priority

privilege



problem

process

product



progress

property

psychology



rank

realism

realm



Rechtsstaat

recognition

reform



relations

remedy

research



response

responsibility

revolution



right

role

rule of law



satisfaction

science

security



service

signals

significance



Soziolekt (group speech)

solidarity

spirit



structure

stability

standing



status

struggle

student



studies

survey

system



talent

teleology

tenets



tension

theory

thinkers



thought

traits

usefulness



utility

value

views



virtue

want

waste



wealth

will

work



worker

world





Many of the combinations given here are even more widely used in a negative, critical form：thus ‘social adjustment’ becomes ‘social maladjustment’, and the same for ‘social disorder’, ‘social injustice’, ‘social insecurity’, ‘social instability’, and so on.

It is difficult to conclude from this list alone whether the word ‘social’ has acquired so many different meanings as to become useless as a tool of communication. However this may be, its practical effect is quite clear and at least threefold. First, it tends pervertedly to insinuate a notion that we have seen from previous chapters to be misconceived – namely, that what has been brought about by the impersonal and spontaneous processes of the extended order is actually the result of deliberate human creation. Second, following from this, it appeals to men to redesign what they never could have designed at all. And third, it also has acquired the power to empty the nouns it qualifies of their meaning.

In this last effect, it has in fact become the most harmful instance of what, after Shakespeare’s ‘I can suck melancholy out of a song, as a weasel suck eggs’ (As You Like It, II, 5), some Americans call a ‘weasel word’. As a weasel is alleged to be able to empty an egg without leaving a visible sign, so can these words deprive of content any term to which they are prefixed while seemingly leaving them untouched. A weasel word is used to draw the teeth from a concept one is obliged to employ, but from which one wishes to eliminate all implications that challenge one’s ideological premises.

On current American usage of the expression see the late Mario Pei’s Weasel Words：The Art of Saying What You Don’t Mean (1978), which credits Theodore Roosevelt with having coined the term in 1918, thus suggesting that seventy years ago American statesmen were remarkably well educated. Yet the reader will not find in that book the prize weasel word ‘social’.

Though abuse of the word ‘social’ is international, it has taken perhaps its most extreme forms in West Germany where the constitution of 1949 employed the expression sozialer Rechtsstaat (social rule of law) and whence the conception of ‘social market economy’ has spread – in a sense which its populariser Ludwig Erhard certainly never intended. (He once assured me in conversation that to him the market economy did not have to be made social but was so already as a result of its origin.) But while the rule of law and the market are, at the start, fairly clear concepts, the attribute ‘social’ empties them of any clear meaning. From these uses of the word ‘social’, German scholars have come to the conclusion that their government is constitutionally subject to the Sozialstaatsprinzip, which means little less than that the rule of law has been suspended. Likewise, such German scholars see a conflict between Rechtsstaat and Sozialstaat and entrench the soziale Rechtsstaat in their constitution – one, I may perhaps say, that was written by Fabian muddle-heads inspired by the nineteenth-century inventor of ‘National Socialism’, Friedrich Naumann (H. Maier, 1972:8).

Similarly, the term ‘democracy’ used to have a fairly clear meaning; yet ‘social democracy’ not only served as the name for the radical Austro-Marxism of the inter-war period but now has been chosen in Britain as a label for a political party committed to a sort of Fabian socialism. Yet the traditional term for what is now called the ‘social state’ was ‘benevolent despotism’, and the very real problem of achieving such despotism democratically, i.e., while preserving individual freedom, is simply wished away by the concoction ‘social democracy’.





