Capitalism Gave Life to the Proletariat

We may in our remaining sections perhaps draw together some of our main arguments and note some of their implications.

If we ask what men most owe to the moral practices of those who are called capitalists the answer is：their very lives. Socialist accounts which ascribe the existence of the proletariat to an exploitation of groups formerly able to maintain themselves are entirely fictional. Most individuals who now make up the proletariat could not have existed before others provided them with means to subsist. Although these folk may feel exploited, and politicians may arouse and play on these feelings to gain power, most of the Western proletariat, and most of the millions of the developing world, owe their existence to opportunities that advanced countries have created for them. All this is not confined to Western countries or the developing world. Communist countries such as Russia would be starving today if their populations were not kept alive by the Western world – although the leaders of these countries would be hard put to admit publicly that we can support the current population of the world, including that of the communist countries, only if we maintain successfully and improve the basis of private property which makes our extended order possible.

Capitalism also introduced a new form of obtaining income from production that liberates people in making them, and often their progeny as well, independent of family groups or tribes. This is so even if capitalism is sometimes prevented from providing all it might for those who wish to take advantage of it by monopolies of organised groups of workers, ‘unions’, which create an artificial scarcity of their kind of work by preventing those willing to do such work for a lower wage from doing so.

The general advantage of replacing concrete particular purposes by abstract rules manifests itself clearly in cases like these. Nobody anticipated what was going to happen. Neither a conscious desire to make the human species grow as fast as possible nor concern for particular known lives produced that result. It was not always even those who first initiated new practices (saving, private property, and such like) whose physical offspring thus gained better chances of surviving. For these practices do not preserve particular lives but rather increase the chances (or prospects or probabilities) of more rapid propagation of the group. Such results were no more desired than foreseen. Some of these practices may indeed have involved a decrease in esteem for some individual lives, a preparedness to sacrifice by infanticide, to abandon the old and sick, or to kill the dangerous, in order to improve the prospects of maintaining and multiplying the rest.

We can hardly claim that to increase mankind is good in some absolute sense. We submit only that this effect, increase of particular populations following particular rules, led to the selection of those practices whose dominance has become the cause of further multiplication. (Nor, as we saw in chapter one, is it suggested that developed morals that restrain and suppress certain innate feelings should wholly displace these feelings. Our inborn instincts are still important in our relations to our immediate neighbours, and in certain other situations as well.)

Yet if the market economy did indeed prevail over other types of order because it enabled those groups that adopted its basic rules the better to multiply, then the calculation in market values is a calculation in terms of lives：individuals guided by this calculation did what most helped to increase their numbers, although this could hardly have been their intention.





