Words as Guides to Action

Trade, migration, and the increase and mixture of populations must not only have opened people’s eyes, but also loosened their tongues. It was not simply that tradesmen inevitably encountered, and sometimes mastered, foreign languages during their travels, but that this must have forced them also to ponder the different connotations of key words (if only to avoid either affronting their hosts or misunderstanding the terms of agreements to exchange), and thereby to come to know new and different views about the most basic matters. I should like now to consider some of the problems relating to language that attend the conflict between the primitive group and the extended order.

All people, whether primitive or civilised, organise what they perceive partly by means of attributes that language has taught them to attach to groups of sensory characteristics. Language enables us not only to label objects given to our senses as distinct entities, but also to classify an infinite variety of combinations of distinguishing marks according to what we expect from them and what we may do with them. Such labelling, classification, and distinction is of course often vague. More importantly, all usage of language is laden with interpretations or theories about our surroundings. As Goethe recognised, all that we imagine to be factual is already theory：what we ‘know’ of our surroundings is our interpretation of them.

As a consequence, various difficulties arise in analysing and criticising our own views. For example, many widely held beliefs live only implicitly in words or phrases implying them and may never become explicit; thus they are never exposed to the possibility of criticism, with the result that language transmits not only wisdom but also a type of folly that is difficult to eradicate.

It is also difficult to explain in a particular vocabulary – because of its own limitations and because of the connotations it bears – something that differs from what that language had traditionally been used to explain. Not only is it difficult to explain, or even to describe something new in received terms, it also may be hard to sort out what language has previously classified in a particular manner – especially a manner based on innate distinctions of our senses.

Such difficulties have driven some scientists to invent new languages for their own disciplines. Reformers, and especially socialists, have been driven by the same urge, and some of them have proposed deliberate reformation of language in order the better to convert people to their own position (see Bloch, 1954–59).

In view of such difficulties, our vocabulary, and the theories embedded in it, are crucial. So long as we speak in language based in erroneous theory, we generate and perpetuate error. Yet the traditional vocabulary that still profoundly shapes our perception of the world and of human interaction within it – and the theories and interpretations embedded in that vocabulary – remain in many ways very primitive. Much of it was formed during long past epochs in which our minds interpreted very differently what our senses conveyed. Thus, while we learn much of what we know through language, the meanings of individual words lead us astray：we continue to use terms bearing archaic connotations as we try to express our new and better understanding of the phenomena to which they refer.

A pertinent example is the way transitive verbs ascribe to inanimate objects some sort of mind-like action. Just as the naive or untutored mind tends to assume the presence of life wherever it perceives movement, it also tends to assume the activity of mind or spirit wherever it imagines that there is purpose. The situation is aggravated by the fact that, to some degree, the evolution of the human race seems to repeat itself during the early development of each human mind. In his account of The Child’s Conception of the World (1929:359), Jean Piaget writes：‘The child begins by seeing purpose everywhere.’ Only secondarily is the mind concerned with differentiating between purposes of the things themselves (animism) and purposes of the makers of the things (artificialism). Animistic connotations cling to many basic words, and particularly to those describing occurrences producing order. Not only ‘fact’ itself but also ‘to cause’, ‘coerce’, ‘distribute’, ‘prefer’, and ‘organise’, terms indispensable in the description of impersonal processes, still evoke in many minds the idea of a personal actor.

The word ‘order’ itself is a clear instance of an expression which, before Darwin, would have been taken almost universally to imply a personal actor. At the beginning of the last century even a thinker of the stature of Jeremy Bentham maintained that ‘order presupposes an end’ (1789/1887, Works’:II, 399). Indeed, it could be said that, until the ‘subjective revolution’ in economic theory of the 1870’s, understanding of human creation was dominated by animism – a conception from which even Adam Smith’s ‘invisible hand’ provided only a partial escape until, in the 1870’s, the guide-role of competitively-determined market prices came to be more clearly understood. Yet even now, outside the scientific examination of law, language and the market, studies of human affairs continue to be dominated by a vocabulary chiefly derived from animistic thinking.

One of the most important examples comes from socialist writers. The more closely one scrutinises their work, the more clearly one sees that they have contributed far more to the preservation than to the reformation of animistic thought and language. Take for instance the personification of ‘society’ in the historicist tradition of Hegel, Comte and Marx. Socialism, with its ‘society’, is indeed the latest form of those animistic interpretations of order historically represented by various religions (with their ‘gods’). The fact that socialism is often directed against religion hardly mitigates this point. Imagining that all order is the result of design, socialists conclude that order must be improvable by better design of some superior mind. For this socialism deserves a place in an authoritative inventory of the various forms of animism – such as that given, in a preliminary way, by E. E. Evans–Pritchard in his Theories of Primitive Religion (1965). In view of the continuing influence of such animism, it seems premature even today to agree with W. K. Clifford, a profound thinker who, already during Darwin’s lifetime, asserted that ‘purpose has ceased to suggest design to instructed people except in cases where the agency of men is independently probable’ (1879:117).

The continuing influence of socialism on the language of intellectuals and scholars is evident also in descriptive studies of history and anthropology. As Braudel asks：‘Who among us has not spoken about the class struggle, the modes of production, the labour force, the surplus value, the relative pauperisation, the practice, the alienation, the infrastructure, the superstructure, the use value, the exchange value, the primitive accumulation, the dialectics, the dictatorship of the proletariat . . .?’ (supposedly all derived from or popularised by Karl Marx：see Braudel 1982b).

In most instances, underlying this sort of talk are not simple statements of fact but interpretations or theories about consequences or causes of alleged facts. To Marx especially we also owe the substitution of the term ‘society’ for the state or compulsory organisation about which he is really talking, a circumlocution that suggests that we can deliberately regulate the actions of individuals by some gentler and kinder method of direction than coercion. Of course the extended, spontaneous order that has been the main subject matter of this volume would have been as little able to ‘act’ or to ‘treat’ particular persons as would a people or a population. On the other hand, the ‘state’ or, better, the ‘government’, which before Hegel used to be the common (and more honest) English word, evidently connoted for Marx too openly and clearly the idea of authority while the vague term ‘society’ allowed him to insinuate that its rule would secure some sort of freedom.

Thus, while wisdom is often hidden in the meaning of words, so is error. Naive interpretations that we now know to be false, as well as profoundly helpful if often unappreciated advice, survive and determine our decisions through the words we use. Of particular relevance to our discussion is the unfortunate fact that many words that we apply to various aspects of the extended order of human cooperation carry misleading connotations of an earlier kind of community. Indeed, many words embodied in our language are of such a character that, if one habitually employs them, one is led to conclusions not implied by any sober thought about the subject in question, conclusions that also conflict with scientific evidence. It was for this reason that in writing this book I imposed upon myself the self-denying ordinance never to use the words ‘society’ or ‘social’ (though they unavoidably occur occasionally in titles of books and in quotations I draw from statements of others; and I have also, on a few occasions, let the expressions ‘the social sciences’ or ‘social studies’ stand). Yet, while I have not hitherto used these terms, in this chapter I wish to discuss them – as well as some other words that function similarly – to expose some of the poison concealed in our language, particularly in that language which concerns the orders and structures of human interaction and interrelationship.

The somewhat simplified quotation by Confucius that stands at the head of this chapter is probably the earliest expression of this concern that has been preserved. An abbreviated form in which I first encountered it apparently stems from there being in Chinese no single word (or set of characters) for liberty. It would also appear, however, that the passage legitimately renders Confucius’s account of the desirable condition of any ordered group of men, as expressed in his Analects (tr. A. Waley, 1938:XIII, 3, 171–2)：‘If the language is incorrect . . . the people will have nowhere to put hand and foot’. I am obliged to David Hawkes, of Oxford, for having traced a truer rendering of a passage I had often quoted in an incorrect form.

The unsatisfactory character of our contemporary vocabulary of political terms results from its descent largely from Plato and Aristotle who, lacking the conception of evolution, considered the order of human affairs as an arrangement of a fixed and unchanging number of men fully known to the governing authority – or, like most religions down to socialism, as the designed product of some superior mind. (Anyone who wishes to pursue the influence of words on political thinking will find rich information in Demandt (1978). In English a helpful discussion of the deceptions brought on by metaphorical language will be found in Cohen (1931); but the fullest discussions of the political abuse of language known to me occur in the German studies of Schoeck (1973), and in H. Schelsky (1975:233–249). I have myself treated some of these matters earlier in my (1967/78:71–97; 1973:26–54; 1976:78–80).)





