The Malthusian Scare：The Fear of Overpopulation

I have been attempting to explain how the extended order of human cooperation has evolved despite opposition from our instincts, despite fear of all the uncertainties inherent in spontaneous processes, despite widespread economic ignorance, and despite the distillation of all these in movements that seek to use allegedly rational means to achieve genuinely atavistic ends. I have also maintained that the extended order would collapse, and that much of our population would suffer and die, if such movements ever did truly succeed in displacing the market. Like it or not, the current world population already exists. Destroying its material foundation in order to attain the ‘ethical’ or instinctually gratifying improvements advocated by socialists would be tantamount to condoning the death of billions and the impoverishment of the rest. (See also my 1954/1967:208; and 1983:25–29.)

The close connection between population size and the presence of, and benefits of, certain evolved practices, institutions, and forms of human interaction is hardly a new discovery. That ‘as it is the power of exchanging that gives occasion to the division of labour, so the extent of this division must always be limited by the extent of this power, or, in other words, by the extent of the market’ was one of Adam Smith’s profoundest insights (1776/1976:31); cf. also the two ‘Fragments on the Division of Labour’ in Lectures on Jurisprudence (1978:582–586). That those following competitive market practices would, as they grew in numbers, displace others who followed different customs, was also seen early. Following John Locke’s similar claim in the Second Treatise (1690/1887), the American historian James Sullivan remarked, as early as 1795, how the native Americans had been displaced by European colonists, and that now five hundred thinking beings could prosper in the same area where previously only a single savage could ‘drag out a hungry existence’ as a hunter (1795:139). (The native American tribes that continued to engage primarily in hunting were displaced also from another direction：by tribes that had learnt to practise agriculture.)

Although the displacement of one group by another, and of one set of practices by another, has often been bloody, it does not need always to be so. No doubt the course of events differed from place to place, and we can hardly go into the details here, but one can imagine many different sequences of events. In some places invaded, as it were, by the extended order, those following new practices, who could extract more from the given land, would often be able to offer other occupants, in return for access to their land (without the occupants having to do any work at all, and without the ‘invaders’ having to use force), nearly as much as, and sometimes even more than, these occupants had obtained by hard toil. On the other hand, the very density of their own settlements would have enabled more advanced people to resist attempts to evict them from extensive territories that they had used, and needed, during periods when they themselves had practised more primitive methods of land use. Many of these processes may then have happened entirely peacefully, although the greater military strength of commercially organised people will often have accelerated the process.

Even if the extension of the market and the growth of population could be achieved entirely by peaceful means, well-informed and thoughtful people are, nevertheless, increasingly reluctant today to continue to accept the association between population growth and the rise of civilisation. Quite the contrary, as they contemplate our present population density and, more especially, the acceleration in the rate of population increase during the past three hundred years, they have become highly alarmed, and construe the prospect of increasing growth of population as a disaster of nightmare quality. Even a sensible philosopher like A. G. N. Flew (1967:60) praised Julian Huxley for recognising early, ‘before this was even as widely admitted as it now is, that human fertility represents the number one threat to the present and future welfare of the human race’.

I have been contending that socialism constitutes a threat to the present and future welfare of the human race, in the sense that neither socialism nor any other known substitute for the market order could sustain the current population of the world. But reactions like the one just quoted, as often as not made by people who do not themselves advocate socialism, suggest that a market order that produces, and is produced by, such a large population also poses a serious threat to the welfare of mankind. Obviously this conflict must now be addressed.

The modern idea that population growth threatens worldwide pauperisation is simply a mistake. It is largely a consequence of oversimplifying the Malthusian theory of population; Thomas Malthus’s theory made a reasonable first approach to the problem in his own time, but modern conditions make it irrelevant. Malthus’s assumption that human labour could be regarded as a more or less homogeneous factor of production (i.e., wage labour was all of the same kind, employed in agriculture, with the same tools and the same opportunities) was not far from the truth in the economic order that then existed (a theoretical two-factor economy). For Malthus, who was also one of the first discoverers of the law of decreasing returns, this must have indicated that every increase in the number of labourers would lead to a reduction of what is now called marginal productivity, and therefore of worker income, particularly once the best land had been occupied by plots of optimum size. (On the relation between Malthus’s two theorems see McCleary, 1953:111.)

This ceases to be true, however, under the changed conditions we have been discussing, wherein labour is not homogeneous but is diversified and specialised. With the intensification of exchange, and improving techniques of communication and transportation, an increase of numbers and density of occupation makes division of labour advantageous, leads to radical diversification, differentiation and specialisation, makes it possible to develop new factors of production, and heightens productivity (see chapters two and three above, and also below). Different skills, natural or acquired, become distinct scarce factors, often manifoldly complementary; this makes it worthwhile to workers to acquire new skills which will then fetch different market prices. Voluntary specialisation is guided by differences in expected rewards. Thus labour may yield increasing rather than decreasing returns. A denser population can also employ techniques and technology that would have been useless in more thinly occupied regions; and if such technologies have already been developed elsewhere they may well be imported and adopted rapidly (provided the required capital can be obtained). Even the bare fact of living peacefully in constant contact with larger numbers makes it possible to utilise available resources more fully.

When, in such a way, labour ceases to be a homogeneous factor of production, Malthus’s conclusions cease to apply. Rather, an increase of population may now, because of further differentiation, make still further increases of population possible, and for indefinite periods population increase may be both self-accelerating and a pre-requisite for any advance in both material and (because of the individuation made possible) spiritual civilisation.

It is, then, not simply more men, but more different men, which brings an increase in productivity. Men have become powerful because they have become so different：new possibilities of specialisation – depending not so much on any increase in individual intelligence but on growing differentiation of individuals – provide the basis for a more successful use of the earth’s resources. This in turn requires an extension of the network of indirect reciprocal services which the signalling mechanism of the market secures. As the market reveals ever new opportunities of specialisation, the two-factor model, with its Malthusian conclusions, becomes increasingly inapplicable.

The widely prevailing fear that the growth of population that attends and fosters all this is apt to lead to general impoverishment and disaster is thus largely due to the misunderstanding of a statistical calculation.

This is not to deny that an increase of population may lead to a reduction of average incomes. But this possibility is also misinterpreted – the misinterpretation here being due to conflating the average income of a number of existing people in different income classes with the average income of a later, larger number of people. The proletariat are an additional population that, without new opportunities of employment, would never have grown up. The fall in average income occurs simply because great population growth generally involves a greater increase of the poorer, rather than the richer, strata of a population. But it is incorrect to conclude that anybody needs to have become poorer in the process. No single member of an existing community need to have become poorer (though some well-to-do people are likely, in the process, to be displaced by some of the newcomers and to descend to a lower level). Indeed, everyone who was already there might have grown somewhat richer; and yet average incomes may have decreased if large numbers of poor people have been added to those formerly present. It is trivially true that a reduction of the average is compatible with all income groups having increased in numbers, but with higher ones increasing in numbers less than the lower ones. That is, if the base of the income pyramid grows more than its height, the average income of the increased total will be smaller.

But it would be more accurate to conclude from this that the process of growth benefits the larger number of the poor more than the smaller number of the rich. Capitalism created the possibility of employment. It created the conditions wherein people who have not been endowed by their parents with the tools and land needed to maintain themselves and their offspring could be so equipped by others, to their mutual benefit. For the process enabled people to live poorly, and to have children, who otherwise, without the opportunity for productive work, could hardly even have grown to maturity and multiplied：it brought into being and kept millions alive who otherwise would not have lived at all and who, if they had lived for a time, could not have afforded to procreate. In this way the poor benefited more from the process. Karl Marx was thus right to claim that ‘capitalism’ created the proletariat：it gave and gives them life.

Thus the whole idea that the rich wrested away from the poor what, without such acts of violence would, or at least might, belong to them, is absurd.

The size of the stock of capital of a people, together with its accumulated traditions and practices for extracting and communicating information, determine whether that people can maintain large numbers. People will be employed, and materials and tools produced to serve future needs of unknown persons, only if those who can invest capital to bridge the interval between present outlay and future return will gain an increment from doing this which is at least as great as what they could have obtained from other uses of that capital.

Thus without the rich – without those who accumulated capital – those poor who could exist at all would be very much poorer indeed, scratching a livelihood from marginal lands on which every drought would kill most of the children they would be trying to raise. The creation of capital altered such conditions more than anything else. As the capitalist became able to employ other people for his own purposes, his ability to feed them served both him and them. This ability increased further as some individuals were able to employ others not just directly to satisfy their own needs but to trade goods and services with countless others. Thus property, contract, trade, and the use of capital did not simply benefit a minority.

Envy and ignorance lead people to regard possessing more than one needs for current consumption as a matter for censure rather than merit. Yet the idea that such capital must be accumulated ‘at the expense of others’ is a throwback to economic views that, however obvious they may seem to some, are actually groundless, and make an accurate understanding of economic development impossible.





