B. THE COMPLEXITY OF PROBLEMS OF HUMAN INTERACTION

Although physical scientists sometimes appear unwilling to recognise the greater complexity of the problems of human interaction, the fact itself was seen more than a hundred years ago by no less a figure than James Clerk Maxwell, who in 1877 wrote that the term ‘physical science’ is often applied ‘in a more or less restricted manner to those branches of science in which the phenomena considered are of the simplest and most abstract kind, excluding the consideration of the more complex phenomena such as those observed in living things’. And more recently a Nobel laureate in physics, Louis W. Alvarez, stressed that ‘actually physics is the simplest of all the sciences. . . . But in the case of an infinitely more complicated system, such as the population of a developing country like India, no one can yet decide how best to change the existing conditions’ (Alvarez, 1968).

Mechanical methods and models of simple causal explanation are increasingly inapplicable as we advance to such complex phenomena. In particular, the crucial phenomena determining the formation of many highly complex structures of human interaction, i.e., economic values or prices, cannot be interpreted by simple causal or ‘nomothetic’ theories, but require explanation in terms of the joint effects of a larger number of distinct elements than we can ever hope individually to observe or manipulate.

It was only the ‘marginal revolution’ of the 1870s that produced a satisfactory explanation of the market processes that Adam Smith had long before described with his metaphor of the ‘invisible hand’, an account which, despite its still metaphorical and incomplete character, was the first scientific description of such self-ordering processes. James and John Stuart Mill, by contrast, were unable to conceive of the determination of market values in any manner other than causal determination by a few preceding events, and this inability barred them, as it does many modern ‘physicalists’, from understanding self-steering market processes. An understanding of the truths underlying marginal utility theory was further delayed by James Mill’s guiding influence on David Ricardo, as well as by Karl Marx’s own work. Attempts to achieve mono-causal explanations in such areas (prolonged even longer in England through the decisive influence of Alfred Marshall and his school) persist to the present.

John Stuart Mill perhaps played the most important role in this connection. He had early put himself under socialist influence, and through this bias acquired a great appeal to ‘progressive’ intellectuals, establishing a reputation as the leading liberal and the ‘Saint of Rationalism’. Yet he probably led more intellectuals into socialism than any other single person：fabianism was in its beginnings essentially formed by a group of his followers.

Mill had barred his way to comprehending the guide function of prices by his doctrinaire assurance that ‘there is nothing in the laws of value which remains for the present or any future writer to clear up’ (1848/1965, Works：III, 456), an assurance that made him believe that ‘considerations of value had to do with [the distribution of wealth] alone’ and not with its production (1848/1965, Works, III：455). Mill was blinded to the function of prices by his assumption that only a process of mechanical causation by some few observable preceding events constituted a legitimate explanation in terms of the standards of natural science. Due to the influence that Mill’s assumption had exerted for so long, the ‘marginal revolution’ of twenty-five years later, when it did arrive, had an explosive effect.

It deserves mentioning here, however, that only six years after Mill’s textbook was published, H. H. Gossen, a thinker who is almost wholly overlooked, had anticipated marginal utility theory in already clearly recognising the dependence of extended production on guidance by prices and emphasising that ‘only with the establishment of private property can the yardstick be found for the determination of the optimal quantity of each commodity to be produced under given circumstances. . . . The greatest possible protection of private property is definitely the greatest necessity for the continuation of human society’ (1854/1983:254–5).

Despite the great harm done by his work, we must probably forgive Mill much for his infatuation with the lady who later became his wife – upon whose death, in his opinion, ‘this country lost the greatest mind it contained’ and who, according to his testimony, ‘in the nobleness of her public object . . . never stopped short of perfect distributive justice as the final aim, implying therefore a state of society entirely communist in practice and spirit’ (1965, Works：XV, 601; and see Hayek, 1951).

Whatever the influence of Mill may be, Marxian economics is still today attempting to explain highly complex orders of interaction in terms of single causal effects like mechanical phenomena rather than as prototypes of those self-ordering processes which give us access to the explanation of highly complex phenomena. It deserves mention however that, as Joachim Reig has pointed out (in his Introduction to the Spanish translation of E. von Böhm-Bawerk’s essay on Marx’s theory of exploitation (1976)), it would seem that after learning of the works of Jevons and Menger, Karl Marx himself completely abandoned further work on capital. If so, his followers were evidently not so wise as he.





