The Intellectuals’ Economic Ignorance

An understanding of trade and of marginal-utility explanations of the determination of relative values is crucial for comprehending the order on which the nourishment of the existing multitudes of human beings depends. Such matters ought to be familiar to every educated person. Such understanding has been thwarted by the general disdain with which intellectuals tend to treat the entire subject. For the fact made clear by marginal utility theory – namely, that it could become every individual’s distinct task, by his several knowledge and skills, to help satisfy the needs of the community through a contribution of his choice – is equally foreign to the primitive mind and to the reigning constructivism, as well as to explicit socialism.

It is no exaggeration to say that this notion marks the emancipation of the individual. To the development of the individualist spirit are due (see chapters two and three above) the division of skills, knowledge and labour on which advanced civilisation rests. As contemporary economic historians like Braudel (1981–84) have begun to comprehend, the disdained middleman, striving for gain, made possible the modern extended order, modern technology, and the magnitude of our current population. The ability, no less than the freedom, to be guided by one’s own knowledge and decisions, rather than being carried away by the spirit of the group, are developments of the intellect which our emotions have followed only imperfectly. Here again, although members of a primitive group may readily concede superior knowledge to a revered leader, they resent it in the fellow who knows a way to obtain by little perceptible effort what others can get only by hard work. To conceal and to use superior information for individual or private gain is still regarded as somehow improper – or at least unneighbourly. And these primitive reactions remain active long after specialisation has become the only way to make use of the acquisition of information in its great variety.

Such reactions also continue today to influence political opinion and action, to thwart the development of the most effective organisation of production, and to encourage the false hopes of socialism. That mankind – which owes the supplies on which it lives as much to trade as to production – should despise the first but overly esteem the second creates a state of affairs that cannot help but have a distorting effect on political attitudes.

Ignorance of the function of trade, which led initially to fear, and in the Middle Ages to uninformed regulation, and which only comparatively recently yielded to better understanding, has, then, now been revived in a new pseudo-scientific form. In this form it lends itself to attempts at technocratic economic manipulation which, when they inevitably fail, encourage a modern form of distrust of ‘capitalism’. Yet the situation may seem worse still when we turn our attention to certain further ordering processes, even harder to understand than is trade, i.e., those governing money and finance.





