‘Where There Is No Property There Is No Justice’

Nor did wise observers of the emerging extended order much doubt that it was rooted in the security, guaranteed by governments, that limited coercion to the enforcement of abstract rules determining what was to belong to whom. The ‘possessive individualism’ of John Locke was, for example, not just a political theory but the product of an analysis of the conditions to which England and Holland owed their prosperity. It was based in the insight that the justice that political authority must enforce, if it wants to secure the peaceful cooperation among individuals on which prosperity rests, cannot exist without the recognition of private property：‘“Where there is no property there is no justice,” is a proposition as certain as any demonstration in Euclid：for the idea of property being a right to anything, and the idea to which the name of injustice is given being the invasion or violation of that right; it is evident that these ideas being thus established, and these names annexed to them, I can as certainly know this proposition to be true as that a triangle has three angles equal to two right ones’ (John Locke：1690/1924:IV, iii, 18). Soon afterwards, Montesquieu made known his message that it had been commerce that spread civilisation and sweet manners among the barbarians of Northern Europe.

For David Hume and other Scottish moralists and theorists of the eighteenth century, it was evident that the adoption of several property marks the beginning of civilisation; rules regulating property seemed so central to all morals that Hume devoted most of his Treatise on morals to them. It was to restrictions on government power to interfere with property that he later, in his History of England (Vol. V), ascribed that country’s greatness; and in the Treatise itself (III, ii) he clearly explained that if mankind were to execute a law which, rather than establishing general rules governing ownership and exchange of property, instead ‘assigned the largest possession to the most extensive virtue, . . . so great is the uncertainty of merit, both from the natural obscurity, and from the self-conceit of every individual, that no determinate rule of conduct would ever follow from it, and the total dissolution of society must be the immediate consequence’. Later, in the Enquiry, he remarked：‘Fanatics may suppose, that domination is founded on grace, and that saints alone inherit the earth; but the civil magistrate very justly puts these sublime theorists on the same footing with the common robbers, and teaches them by severe discipline, that a rule, which, in speculation, may seem the most advantageous to society, may yet be found, in practice, totally pernicious and destructive’ (1777/1886:IV, 187).

Hume noticed clearly the connection of these doctrines to freedom, and how the maximum freedom of all requires equal restraints on the freedom of each through what he called the three ‘fundamental laws of nature’：‘the stability of possession, of its transference by consent, and of the performance of promises’ (1739/1886:II, 288, 293). Though his views evidently derived in part from those of theorists of the common law, such as Sir Matthew Hale (1609-76), Hume may have been the first clearly to perceive that general freedom becomes possible by the natural moral instincts being ‘checked and restrained by a subsequent judgement’ according to ‘justice, or a regard to the property of others, fidelity, or the observance of promises [which have] become obligatory, and acquire[d] an authority over mankind’ (1741, 1742/1886:III, 455). Hume did not make the error, later so common, of confusing two senses of freedom：that curious sense in which an isolated individual is supposed to be able to be free, and that in which many persons collaborating with one another can be free. Seen in the latter context of such collaboration, only abstract rules of property – i.e., the rules of law – guarantee freedom.

When Adam Ferguson summed up such teaching by defining the savage as a man who did not yet know property (1767/73:136), and when Adam Smith remarked that ‘nobody ever saw one animal by its gestures or natural cries signify to another, this is mine, that is yours’ (1776/1976:26), they expressed what, in spite of recurrent revolts by rapacious or hungry bands, had for practically two millennia been the view of the educated. As Ferguson put it, ‘It must appear very evident, that property is a matter of progress’ (ibid.). Such matters were, as we have noticed, also then investigated in language and the law; they were well understood in the classical liberalism of the nineteenth century; and it was probably through Edmund Burke, but perhaps even more through the influence of German linguists and lawyers like F. C. von Savigny, that these themes were then taken up again by H. S. Maine. Savigny’s statement (in his protest against the codification of the civil law) deserves to be reproduced at length：‘If in such contacts free agents are to exist side by side, mutually supporting and not impeding each other in their development, this can be achieved only by recognising an invisible boundary within which the existence and operation of each individual is assured a certain free space. The rules by which these boundaries and through it the free range of each is determined is the law’ (Savigny, 1840:I, 331–2).



