Diversity and Differentiation

Differentiation is the key to understanding population growth, and we should pause to expand on this crucial point. The unique achievement of man, leading to many of his other distinct characteristics, is his differentiation and diversity. Apart from a few other species in which selection artificially imposed by man has produced comparable diversity, man’s diversification is unparalleled. This occurred because, in the course of natural selection, humans developed a highly efficient organ for learning from their fellows. This has made the increase of man’s numbers, over much of his history, not, as in other instances, self-limiting, but rather self-stimulating. Human population grew in a sort of chain reaction in which greater density of occupation of territory tended to produce new opportunities for specialisation and thus led to an increase of individual productivity and in turn to a further increase of numbers. There also developed among such large numbers of people not only a variety of innate attributes but also an enormous variety of streams of cultural traditions among which their great intelligence enabled them to select – particularly during their prolonged adolescence. The greater part of humankind can now maintain itself just because its members are so flexible, just because there are so many different individuals whose different gifts enable them to differentiate themselves from one another even further by absorbing a boundless variety of combinations of differing streams of traditions.

The diversity for which increasing density provided new opportunities was essentially that of labour and skills, of information and knowledge, of property and incomes. The process is neither simple nor causal nor predictable, for at each step increasing population density merely creates unrealised possibilities which may or may not be discovered and realised rapidly. Only where some earlier population had already passed through this stage and its example could be imitated, could the process be very rapid. Learning proceeds through a multiplicity of channels and presupposes a great variety of individual positions and connections among groups and individuals through which possibilities of collaboration emerge.

Once people learn to take advantage of new opportunities offered by increased density of population (not only because of the specialisation brought about by division of labour, knowledge and property, but also by some individual accumulation of new forms of capital), this becomes the basis of yet further increases. Thanks to multiplication, differentiation, communication and interaction over increasing distances, and transmission through time, mankind has become a distinct entity preserving certain structural features that can produce effects beneficial to a further increase of numbers.

So far as we know, the extended order is probably the most complex structure in the universe – a structure in which biological organisms that are already highly complex have acquired the capacity to learn, to assimilate, parts of suprapersonal traditions enabling them to adapt themselves from moment to moment into an ever-changing structure possessing an order of a still higher level of complexity. Step by step, momentary impediments to further population increase are penetrated, increases in population provide a foundation for further ones, and so on, leading to a progressive and cumulative process that does not end before all the fertile or richly endowed parts of the earth are similarly densely occupied.





