Justification and Revision of Traditional Morals

The rationalist standards on which this whole argument, indeed this whole programme, rest, are however at best counsels of perfection and at worst the discredited rules of an ancient methodology which may have been incorporated into some of what is thought of as science, but which has nothing to do with real investigation. A highly evolved, rather sophisticated moral system exists side by side, in our extended order, with the primitive theory of rationality and of science sponsored by constructivism, scientism, positivism, hedonism, and socialism. This does not speak against reason and science but against these theories of rationality and science, and some of the practice thereof. All this begins to become evident when it is realised that nothing is justifiable in the way demanded. Not only is this so of morals, but also of language and law and even science itself.

That what I have just written applies to science too may be unfamiliar to some who are not informed of current advances and controversies within the philosophy of science. But it is indeed true not only that our current scientific laws are not justified or justifiable in the way that constructivist methodologists demand, but that we have reason to suppose that we shall eventually learn that many of our present scientific conjectures are untrue. Any conception that guides us more successfully than what we hitherto believed may, moreover, although a great advance, be in substance as mistaken as its predecessor. As we have learnt from Karl Popper (1934/1959), our aim must be to make our successive mistakes as quickly as possible. If we were meanwhile to abandon all present conjectures that we cannot prove to be true, we would soon be back at the level of the savage who trusts only his instincts. Yet this is what all versions of scientism have advised – from Cartesian rationalism to modern positivism.

Moreover, while it is true that traditional morals, etc., are not rationally justifiable, this is also true of any possible moral code, including any that socialists might ever be able to come up with. Hence no matter what rules we follow, we will not be able to justify them as demanded; so no argument about morals – or science, or law, or language – can legitimately turn on the issue of justification (see Bartley, 1962/1984; 1964, 1982). If we stopped doing everything for which we do not know the reason, or for which we cannot provide a justification in the sense demanded, we would probably very soon be dead.

The issue of justification is indeed a red herring, owing in part to mistaken, and inconsistent, assumptions arising within our main epistemological and methodological tradition which in some cases go back to antiquity. Confusion about justification also stems, particularly so far as the issues that mainly occupy us are concerned, from Auguste Comte, who supposed that we were capable of remaking our moral system as a whole, and replacing it by a completely constructed and justified (or as Comte himself said, ‘demonstrated’) body of rules.

I shall not state here all the reasons for the irrelevance of traditional demands for justification. But just to take as an example (one appropriate also to the argument of the following section) one popular way of attempting to justify morality, it should be noticed that there is no point to assuming, as rationalist and hedonistic theories of ethics do, that our morality is justified just to the extent, say, that it is directed towards the production of, or striving after, some specific goal such as happiness. There is no reason to suppose that the selection by evolution of such habitual practices as enabled men to nourish larger numbers had much if anything to do with the production of happiness, let alone that it was guided by the striving after it. On the contrary, there is much to indicate that those who aimed simply at happiness would have been overwhelmed by those who just wanted to preserve their lives.

While our moral traditions cannot be constructed, justified or demonstrated in the way demanded, their processes of formation can be partially reconstructed, and in doing so we can to some degree understand the needs that they serve. To the extent we succeed in this, we are indeed called upon to improve and revise our moral traditions by remedying recognisable defects by piecemeal improvement based on immanent criticism (see Popper, 1945/66, and 1983:29–30), that is, by analysing the compatibility and consistency of their parts, and tinkering with the system accordingly.

As examples of such piecemeal improvement, we have mentioned new contemporary studies of copyright and patents. To take another example, much as we owe to the classical (Roman law) concept of several property as the exclusive right to use or abuse a physical object in any manner we like, it oversimplifies the rules required to maintain an efficient market economy, and a whole new sub-discipline of economics is growing up, devoted to ascertaining how the traditional institution of property can be improved to make the market function better.

What is needed as a preliminary for such analyses includes what is sometimes called a ‘rational reconstruction’ (using the word ‘construction’ in a sense very different from ‘constructivism’) of how the system might have come into being. This is in effect an historical, even natural-historical, investigation, not an attempt to construct, justify, or demonstrate the system itself. It would resemble what followers of Hume used to call ‘conjectural history’, which tried to make intelligible why some rules rather than others had prevailed (but never overlooked Hume’s basic contention, which cannot often enough be repeated, that ‘the rules of morality are not the conclusions of our reason’). This is the path taken not only by the Scottish philosophers but by a long chain of students of cultural evolution, from the classical Roman grammarians and linguists, to Bernard Mandeville, through Herder, Giambattista Vico (who had the profound insight that homo non intelligendo fit omnia (‘man became all he is without understanding it’ (1854：V, 183)), and the German historians of law that we have mentioned, such as von Savigny, and on to Carl Menger. Menger was the only one of these to have come after Darwin, yet all attempted to provide a rational reconstruction, conjectural history, or evolutionary account of the emergence of cultural institutions.

At this point I find myself in the embarrassing position of wanting to claim that it must be the members of my own profession, the economists, specialists who understand the process of formation of extended orders, who are most likely to be able to provide explanations of those moral traditions that made the growth of civilisation possible. Only someone who can account for effects such as those connected with several property can explain why this type of practice enabled those groups following it to outstrip others whose morals were better suited to the achievement of different aims. But my desire to plead for my fellow economists, while partly in order, would perhaps be more appropriate were not so many of them themselves infected with constructivism.

How then do morals arise? What is our ‘rational reconstruction’? We have already sketched it in the foregoing chapters. Apart from the constructivist contention that an adequate morality can be designed and constructed afresh by reason, there are at least two other possible sources of morality. There is, first, as we saw, the innate morality, so-called, of our instincts (solidarity, altruism, group decision, and such like), the practices flowing from which are not sufficient to sustain our present extended order and its population.

Second, there is the evolved morality (savings, several property, honesty, and so on) that created and sustains the extended order. As we have already seen, this morality stands between instinct and reason, a position that has been obscured by the false dichotomy of instinct versus reason.

The extended order depends on this morality in the sense that it came into being through the fact that those groups following its underlying rules increased in numbers and in wealth relative to other groups. The paradox of our extended order, and of the market – and a stumbling block for socialists and constructivists – is that, through this process, we are able to sustain more from discoverable resources (and indeed in that very process discover more resources) than would be possible by a personally directed process. And although this morality is not ‘justified’ by the fact that it enables us to do these things, and thereby to survive, it does enable us to survive, and there is something perhaps to be said for that.





