Traditional Morals Fail to Meet Rational Requirements

The four requirements just listed – that whatever is not scientifically proven, or is not fully understood, or lacks a fully specified purpose, or has some unknown effects, is unreasonable – are particularly well suited to constructivist rationalism and to socialist thought. These two approaches themselves flow from a mechanistic or physicalist interpretation of the extended order of human cooperation, that is, from conceiving ordering as the sort of arranging and controlling one could do with a group if one had access to all the facts known to its members. But the extended order is not, and could not be, such an order.

Hence I wish to concede forthwith that most tenets, institutions, and practices of traditional morality and of capitalism do not meet the requirements or criteria stated and are – from the perspective of this theory of reason and science – ‘unreasonable’ and ‘unscientific’. Moreover, since, as we have also admitted, those who continue to follow traditional practices do not themselves usually understand how these practices were formed or how they endure, it is hardly surprising that alternative ‘justifications’, so-called, that traditionalists sometimes offer for their practices are often rather naive (and hence have provided fair game for our intellectuals), and have no connection with the real reasons for their success. Many traditionalists do not even bother with justifications that could not be provided anyway (thus allowing intellectuals to denounce them as anti-intellectual or dogmatic), but go on following their practices out of habit or religious faith. Nor is this in any way ‘news’. After all, it was over 250 years ago that Hume observed that ‘the rules of morality are not the conclusions of our reason’. Yet Hume’s claim has not sufficed to deter most modern rationalists from continuing to believe – curiously enough often quoting Hume in their support – that something not derived from reason must be either nonsense or a matter for arbitrary preference, and, accordingly, to continue to demand rational justifications.

Not only the traditional tenets of religion, such as the belief in God, and much traditional morality concerning sex and the family (matters with which I am not concerned in this book), fail to meet these requirements, but also the specific moral traditions that do concern me here, such as private property, saving, exchange, honesty, truthfulness, contract.

The situation may look even worse if one considers that the traditions, institutions and beliefs mentioned not only fail to meet the logical, methodological, and epistemological requirements stated, but that they are also often rejected by socialists on other grounds too. For example, they are seen, as by Chisholm and Keynes, as a ‘crippling burden’, and also, as by Wells and Forster, as closely associated with despicable trade and commerce (see chapter six). And they also may be seen, as is especially fashionable today, as sources of alienation and oppression, and of ‘social injustice’.

After such objections, the conclusion is reached that there is an urgent need to construct a new, rationally revised and justified morality which does meet these requirements, and which is, for that matter, one which will not be a crippling burden, be alienating, oppressive, or ‘unjust’, or be associated with trade. Moreover, this is only part of the great task that these new lawgivers – socialists such as Einstein, Monod and Russell, and self-proclaimed ‘immoralists’ such as Keynes – set for themselves. A new rational language and law must be constructed too, for existing language and law also fail to meet these requirements, and for what turn out to be the same reasons. (For that matter, even the laws of science do not meet these requirements (Hume, 1739/1951; and see Popper, 1934/59).) This awesome task may seem the more urgent to them in that they themselves no longer believe in any supernatural sanction for morality (let alone for language, law, and science) and yet remain convinced that some justification is necessary.

So, priding itself on having built its world as if it had designed it, and blaming itself for not having designed it better, humankind is now to set out to do just that. The aim of socialism is no less than to effect a complete redesigning of our traditional morals, law, and language, and on this basis to stamp out the old order and the supposedly inexorable, unjustifiable conditions that prevent the institution of reason, fulfilment, true freedom, and justice.





