The Calculus of Costs Is a Calculus of Lives

Though the concept of a ‘calculus of lives’ cannot be taken literally, it is more than a metaphor. There may be no simple quantitative relationships governing the preservation of human lives by economic action, but the importance of the ultimate effects of market conduct can hardly be overrated. Yet several qualifications have to be added. For the most part, only unknown lives will count as so many units when it is a question of sacrificing a few lives in order to serve a larger number elsewhere.

Even if we do not like to face the fact, we constantly have to make such decisions. Unknown individual lives, in public or private decisions, are not absolute values, and the builder of motor roads or of hospitals or electric equipment will never carry precautions against lethal accidents to the maximum, because by avoiding costs this would cause elsewhere, overall risks to human lives can be much reduced. When the army surgeon after a battle engages in ‘triage’ – when he lets one die who might be saved, because in the time he would have to devote to saving him he could save three other lives (see Hardin, 1980:59, who defines ‘triage’ as ‘the procedure which saves the maximum of lives’) – he is acting on a calculus of lives. This is another instance of how the alternative between saving more or fewer lives shapes our views, even if only as vague feelings about what ought to be done. The requirement of preserving the maximum number of lives is not that all individual lives be regarded as equally important. It may be more important to save the life of the doctor, in our example above, than to save the lives of any particular one of his patients：otherwise none might survive. Some lives are evidently more important in that they create or preserve other lives. The good hunter or defender of the community, the fertile mother and perhaps even the wise old man may be more important than most babies and most of the aged. On the preservation of the life of a good chief large numbers of other lives may depend. And the highly productive may be more valuable to the community than other adult individuals. It is not the present number of lives that evolution will tend to maximise but the prospective stream of future lives. If in a group all men of fertile age, or all such women, and the required numbers to defend and feed them, were preserved, the prospects of future growth would hardly be affected, whereas the death of all females under forty-five would destroy all possibility of preserving the strain.

But if for this reason all unknown lives must count equally in the extended order – and in our own ideals we have closely approached this aim so far as government action is concerned – this aim has never governed behaviour in the small group or in our innate responses. Thus one is led to raise the question of the morality or goodness of the principle.

Yet, as with every other organism, the main ‘purpose’ to which man’s physical make-up as well as his traditions are adapted is to produce other human beings. In this he has succeeded amazingly, and his conscious striving will have its most lasting effect only so far as, with or without his knowledge, it contributes to this result. There is no real point in asking whether those of his actions which do so contribute are really ‘good’, particularly if thus it is intended to inquire whether we like the results. For, as we have seen, we have never been able to choose our morals. Though there is a tendency to interpret goodness in a utilitarian way, to claim that ‘good’ is what brings about desired results, this claim is neither true nor useful. Even if we restrict ourselves to common usage, we find that the word ‘good’ generally refers to what tradition tells us we ought to do without knowing why – which is not to deny that justifications are always being invented for particular traditions. We can however perfectly well ask which among the many and conflicting rules that tradition treats as good tend, under particular conditions, to preserve and multiply those groups that follow them.





