A Litany of Errors

The ideas raised in these examples have in common a number of closely interconnected thematic roots, roots that are not just matters of common historical antecedents. Readers unfamiliar with some of the background literature may not immediately see some of the interconnections. Hence I should like, before further probing these ideas themselves, to identify a number of recurring themes – most of which may appear at first glance to be unobjectionable and all of which are familiar – which, taken together, form a sort of argument. This ‘argument’ could also be described as a litany of errors, or as a recipe for producing the presumptive rationalism that I call scientism and constructivism. To start on our way, let us consult that ready ‘source of knowledge’, the dictionary, a book containing many recipes. I have gathered from the very useful Fontana/Harper Dictionary of Modern Thought (1977) a few short definitions of four basic philosophical concepts that generally guide contemporary thinkers educated along scientistic and constructivistic lines：rationalism, empiricism, positivism, and utilitarianism – concepts which have, during the past several hundred years, come to be regarded as representative expressions of the scientific ‘spirit of the age’. According to these definitions, which are written by Lord Quinton, a British philosopher who is President of Trinity College, Oxford, rationalism denies the acceptability of beliefs founded on anything but experience and reasoning, deductive or inductive. Empiricism maintains that all statements claiming to express knowledge are limited to those depending for their justification on experience. Positivism is defined as the view that all true knowledge is scientific, in the sense of describing the coexistence and succession of observable phenomena. And utilitarianism ‘takes the pleasure and pain of everyone affected by it to be the criterion of the action’s rightness’.

In such definitions one finds quite explicitly, just as one finds implicitly in the examples cited in the preceding section, the declarations of faith of modern science and philosophy of science, and their declarations of war against moral traditions. These declarations, definitions, postulates, have created the impression that only that which is rationally justifiable, only that which is provable by observational experiment, only that which can be experienced, only that which can be surveyed, deserves belief; that only that which is pleasurable should be acted upon, and that all else must be repudiated. This in turn leads directly to the contention that the leading moral traditions that have created and are creating our culture – which certainly cannot be justified in such ways, and which are often disliked – are unworthy of adherence, and that our task must be to construct a new morality on the basis of scientific knowledge – usually the new morality of socialism.

These definitions, together with our earlier examples, when examined more closely, prove indeed to contain the following presuppositions:

1) The idea that it is unreasonable to follow what one cannot justify scientifically or prove observationally (Monod, Born).

2) The idea that it is unreasonable to follow what one does not understand. This notion is implicit in all our examples, but I must confess that I too once held it, and have also been able to find it in a philosopher with whom I generally agree. Thus Sir Karl Popper once claimed (1948/63:122; emphasis added) that rationalist thinkers ‘will not submit blindly to any tradition’, which is of course just as impossible as obeying no tradition. This must, however, have been a slip of the pen, for elsewhere he has rightly observed that ‘we never know what we are talking about’ (1974/1976:27, on which see also Bartley, 1985/1987). (Though the free man will insist on his right to examine and, when appropriate, to reject any tradition, he could not live among other people if he refused to accept countless traditions without even thinking about them, and of whose effects he remains ignorant.)

3) The related idea that it is unreasonable to follow a particular course unless its purpose is fully specified in advance (Einstein, Russell, Keynes).

4) The idea, also closely related, that it is unreasonable to do anything unless its effects are not only fully known in advance but also fully observable and seen to be beneficial (the utilitarians). (Assumptions 2, 3, and 4, are, despite their different emphases, nearly identical; but I have distinguished them here to call attention to the fact that the arguments for them turn, depending on who is defending them, either on lack of understandability generally, or, more particularly, on lack of specified purpose or lack of complete and observable knowledge of effects.)

One could name further requirements, but these four – which we shall examine in the following two chapters – will suffice for our (largely illustrative) purposes. Two things might be noticed about these requirements from the very start. First, not one of them shows any awareness that there might be limits to our knowledge or reason in certain areas, or considers that, in such circumstances, the most important task of science might be to discover what these limits are. We shall learn below that there are such limits and that they can indeed partially be overcome, as for example through the science of economics or ‘catallactics’, but that they cannot be overcome if one holds to the above four requirements. Second, one finds in the approach underlying the requirements not only lack of understanding, not only the failure to consider or deal with such problems, but also a curious lack of curiosity about how our extended order actually came into being, how it is maintained, and what the consequences might be of destroying those traditions that created and maintain it.





