The Challenge to Property

Although Aristotle was blind to the importance of trade, and lacked any comprehension of evolution; and though Aristotelian thought, once embedded in the system of Thomas Aquinas, supported the anti-commercial attitudes of the mediaeval and early modern Church, it was nonetheless only rather later, and chiefly among seventeenth- and eighteenth-century French thinkers, that several important developments occurred which, taken together, began effectively to challenge the central values and institutions of the extended order.

The first of these developments was the growing importance, associated with the rise of modern science, of that particular form of rationalism that I call ‘constructivism’ or ‘scientism’ (after the French), which for the following several centuries virtually captured serious thought about reason and its role in human affairs. This particular form of rationalism has been the point of departure of investigations that I have conducted over the past sixty years, investigations in which I tried to show that it is particularly ill-considered, embedding a false theory of science and of rationality in which reason is abused, and which, most important here, leads invariably to an erroneous interpretation of the nature and coming into being of human institutions. That interpretation is one by which, in the name of reason and the highest values of civilisation, moralists end up flattering the relatively unsuccessful and inciting people to satisfy their primitive desires.

Descending in the modern period from René Descartes, this form of rationalism not only discards tradition, but claims that pure reason can directly serve our desires without any such intermediary, and can build a new world, a new morality, a new law, even a new and purified language, from itself alone. Although the theory is plainly false (see also Popper, 1934/1959, and 1945/66), it still dominates the thinking of most scientists, and also of most literati, artists, and intellectuals.

I should perhaps immediately qualify what I have just written by adding that there are other strands within what might be called rationalism which treat these matters differently, as for example that which views rules of moral conduct as themselves part of reason. Thus John Locke had explained that ‘by reason, however, I do not think is meant here the faculty of understanding which forms trains of thoughts and deduces proofs, but definite principles of action from which spring all virtues and whatever is necessary for the moulding of morals’ (1954:11). Yet views such as Locke’s remain much in the minority among those who call themselves rationalists.

The second, related development which challenged the extended order arose from the work and influence of Jean–Jacques Rousseau. This peculiar thinker – although often described as irrationalist or romantic – also latched on to and deeply depended on Cartesian thought. Rousseau’s heady brew of ideas came to dominate ‘progressive’ thought, and led people to forget that freedom as a political institution had arisen not by human beings ‘striving for freedom’ in the sense of release from restraints, but by their striving for the protection of a known secure individual domain. Rousseau led people to forget that rules of conduct necessarily constrain and that order is their product; and that these rules, precisely by limiting the range of means that each individual may use for his purposes, greatly extend the range of ends each can successfully pursue.

It was Rousseau who – declaring in the opening statement of The Social Contract that ‘man was born free, and he is everywhere in chains’, and wanting to free men from all ‘artificial’ restraints – made what had been called the savage the virtual hero of progressive intellectuals, urged people to shake off the very restraints to which they owed their productivity and numbers, and produced a conception of liberty that became the greatest obstacle to its attainment. After asserting that animal instinct was a better guide to orderly cooperation among men than either tradition or reason, Rousseau invented the fictitious will of the people, or ‘general will’, through which the people ‘becomes one single being, one individual’ (Social Contract, I, vii; and see Popper, 1945/1966:II, 54). This is perhaps the chief source of the fatal conceit of modern intellectual rationalism that promises to lead us back to a paradise wherein our natural instincts rather than learnt restraints upon them will enable us ‘to subdue the world’, as we are instructed in the book of Genesis.

The admittedly great seductive appeal of this view hardly owes its power (whatever it may claim) to reason and evidence. As we have seen, the savage was far from free; nor could he have subdued the world. He could indeed do little unless the whole group to which he belonged agreed. Individual decision presupposed individual spheres of control, and thus became possible only with the evolution of several property, whose development, in turn, laid the foundation for the growth of an extended order transcending the perception of the headman or chief – or of the collectivity.

Despite these contradictions, there is no doubt that Rousseau’s outcry was effective or that, during the past two centuries, it has shaken our civilisation. Moreover, irrationalist as it is, it nonetheless did appeal precisely to progressivists by its Cartesian insinuation that we might use reason to obtain and justify direct gratification of our natural instincts. After Rousseau gave intellectual license to throw off cultural restraints, to confer legitimacy on attempts to gain ‘freedom’ from the restraints that had made freedom possible, and to call this attack on the foundation of freedom ‘liberation’, property became increasingly suspect and was no longer so widely recognised as the key factor that had brought about the extended order. It was increasingly supposed, rather, that rules regulating the delimitation and transfer of several property might be replaced by central decision about its use.

Indeed, by the nineteenth century, serious intellectual appreciation and discussion of the role of property in the development of civilisation would seem to have fallen under a kind of ban in many quarters. During this time property gradually became suspect among many of those who might have been expected to investigate it, a topic to be avoided by progressive believers in a rational reshaping of the structure of human cooperation. (That this ban has persisted into the twentieth century is evinced by, for example, Brian Barry’s declarations (1961:80) about usage and ‘analyticity’, wherein justice ‘is now analytically tied to “desert” and “need”, so that one could say quite properly that some of what Hume called “rules of justice” were unjust’, and Gunnar Myrdal’s later mocking remark about the ‘taboos of property and contract’ (1969:17).) The founders of anthropology, for instance, increasingly neglected the cultural role of property, so that in E. B. Tylor’s two volumes on Primitive Culture (1871), for instance, neither property nor ownership appear in the index, while E. Westermarck – who did devote a long chapter to property – already treats it, under the influence of Saint–Simon and Marx, as the objectionable source of ‘unearned income’, and concludes from this that the ‘law of property will sooner or later undergo a radical change’ (1908:II, 71). The socialist bias of constructivism has also influenced contemporary archaeology, but it displays its inability to comprehend economic phenomena most crudely in sociology (and even worse in the so-called ‘sociology of knowledge’). Sociology itself might almost be called a socialist science, having been openly presented as capable of creating a new order of socialism (Ferri, 1895), or more recently able ‘to predict the future development and to shape the future, or . . . create the future of mankind’ (Segerstedt, 1969:441). Like the ‘naturology’ that once pretended to replace all specialised investigations of nature, sociology proceeds in sovereign disregard of knowledge gained by established disciplines that have long studied such grown structures as law, language, and the market.

I have just written that the study of traditional institutions such as property ‘fell under a ban’. This is hardly an exaggeration, for it is highly curious that so interesting and important a process as the evolutionary selection of moral traditions has been so little studied, and the direction these traditions gave to the development of civilisation so largely ignored. Of course this will not seem so peculiar to a constructivist. If one suffers under the delusion of ‘social engineering’, the notion that man can consciously choose where he wants to go, it will not seem so important to discover how he reached his present situation.

It may be mentioned in passing, although I cannot explore the matter here, that challenges to property and traditional values came not only from followers of Rousseau：they also stemmed, although perhaps less importantly, from religion. For the revolutionary movements of this period (rationalistic socialism and then communism) helped to revive old heretical traditions of religious revolt against basic institutions of property and family – revolts directed in earlier centuries by heretics such as the Gnostics, the Manichaeans, the Bogomils, and the Cathars. By the nineteenth century, these particular heretics were gone, but thousands of new religious revolutionaries appeared who directed much of their zeal against both property and the family, also appealing to primitive instincts against such restraints. Rebellion against private property and the family was, in short, not restricted to socialists. Mystic and supernatural beliefs were invoked not only to justify customary restraints upon instincts, as for example in the dominant streams of Roman Catholicism and Protestantism, but also, in more peripheral movements, to support the release of instincts.

Limits of space as well as insufficient competence forbid me to deal in this book with the second of the traditional objects of atavistic reaction that I have just mentioned：the family. I ought however at least to mention that I believe that new factual knowledge has in some measure deprived traditional rules of sexual morality of some of their foundation, and that it seems likely that in this area substantial changes are bound to occur.

Having mentioned Rousseau and his pervasive influence, as well as these other historical developments, if only to remind readers that the revolt against property and traditional morality on the part of serious thinkers is not just comparatively recent, I shall turn now to some twentieth-century intellectual heirs of Rousseau and Descartes.

First, however, I should emphasise that I am largely neglecting here the long history of this revolt, as well as the different turns it has taken in different lands. Long before Auguste Comte introduced the term ‘positivism’ for the view that represented a ‘demonstrated ethics’ (demonstrated by reason, that is) as the only possible alternative to a supernaturally ‘revealed ethics’ (1854:I, 356), Jeremy Bentham had developed the most consistent foundations of what we now call legal and moral positivism：that is, the constructivistic interpretation of systems of law and morals according to which their validity and meaning are supposed to depend wholly on the will and intention of their designers. Bentham is himself a late figure in this development. This constructivism includes not only the Benthamite tradition, represented and continued by John Stuart Mill and the later English Liberal Party, but also practically all contemporary Americans who call themselves ‘liberals’ (as opposed to some other very different thinkers, more often found in Europe, who are also called liberals, who are better called ‘old Whigs’, and whose outstanding thinkers were Alexis de Tocqueville and Lord Acton). This constructivist way of thinking becomes virtually inevitable if, as an acute contemporary Swiss analyst suggests, one accepts the prevailing liberal (read ‘socialist’) philosophy that assumes that man, so far as the distinction between good and bad has any significance for him at all, must, and can, himself deliberately draw the line between them (Kirsch, 1981:17).





