D. ALIENATION, DROPOUTS, AND THE CLAIMS OF PARASITES

In this section I should like to record a few reflections about the matters named in the title of this section.

1. As we have seen, conflict between an individual’s emotions and what is expected of him in an extended order is virtually inevitable：innate responses tend to break through the network of learnt rules that maintain civilisation. But only Rousseau provided literary and intellectual credentials for reactions that cultivated people once dismissed as simply uncouth. Regarding the natural (read ‘instinctual’) as good or desirable is, in his work, an expression of nostalgia for the simple, the primitive, or even the barbarian, based on the conviction that one ought to satisfy his or her desires, rather than to obey shackles allegedly invented and imposed by selfish interests.

In a milder form, disappointment at the failure of our traditional morality to produce greater pleasure has recently found expression in nostalgia for the small that is beautiful, or in complaints about The Joyless Economy (Schumacher, 1973, Scitovsky, 1976, as well as much of the literature of ‘alienation’).

2. Mere existence cannot confer a right or moral claim on anyone against any other. Persons or groups may incur duties to particular individuals; but as part of the system of common rules that assist humankind to grow and multiply not even all existing lives have a moral claim to preservation. A practice that seems so harsh to us wherein some Eskimo tribes leave senile members to die at the beginning of their seasonal migration may well be necessary for them to bring their offspring to the next season. And it is at least an open question whether it is a moral duty to prolong the lives of suffering incurables as long as modern medicine can. Such questions arise even before we ask to whom such claims can be validly addressed.

Rights derive from systems of relations of which the claimant has become a part through helping to maintain them. If he ceases to do so, or has never done so (or nobody has done so for him) there exists no ground on which such claims could be founded. Relations between individuals can exist only as products of their wills, but the mere wish of a claimant can hardly create a duty for others. Only expectations produced by long practice can create duties for the members of the community in which they prevail, which is one reason why prudence must be exercised in the creation of expectations, lest one incur a duty that one cannot fulfill.

3. Socialism has taught many people that they possess claims irrespective of performance, irrespective of participation. In the light of the morals that produced the extended order of civilisation, socialists in fact incite people to break the law.

Those who claim to have been ‘alienated’ from what most of them apparently never learnt, and who prefer to live as parasitic dropouts, draining the products of a process to which they refuse to contribute, are true followers of Rousseau’s appeal for a return to nature, representing as the chief evil those institutions that made possible the formation of an order of human coordination.

I do not question any individual’s right voluntarily to withdraw from civilisation. But what ‘entitlements’ do such persons have? Are we to subsidise their hermitages? There cannot be any entitlement to be exempted from the rules on which civilisation rests. We may be able to assist the weak and disabled, the very young and old, but only if the sane and adult submit to the impersonal discipline which gives us means to do so.

It would be quite wrong to regard such errors as originating with the young. They reflect what they are taught, the pronouncements of their parents – and of departments of psychology and sociology of education and the characteristic intellectuals whom they produce – pale reproductions of Rousseau and Marx, Freud and Keynes, transmitted through intellects whose desires have outrun their understanding.





