G. SUPERSTITION AND THE PRESERVATION OF TRADITION

This volume was nearly ready for the printers when a friendly comment by Dr. D. A. Rees on a lecture I had given drew my attention to a remarkable little study by Sir James Frazer (1909) – Psyche’s Task – bearing the subtitle given above. In it, as Frazer explained, he endeavoured to ‘sort out the seeds of good from the seeds of evil’. It deals with my central subject in a manner in many respects similar, but, coming as it does from a distinguished anthropologist, it is able to give, particularly on the early development of property and the family, so much more empirical evidence that I wish I could reprint the whole of its 84 pages as an illustrative appendix to this volume. Among those of his conclusions which are pertinent to this volume, he explains how superstition, by strengthening respect for marriage, contributed to stricter observance of rules of sexual morality among both married and unmarried. In his chapter on private property (17), Frazer points out that ‘the effect of tabooing a thing [was] to endow it with a supernatural or magical energy that rendered it practically unapproachable by any but the owner. Thus taboo became a powerful instrument for strengthening the ties, perhaps our socialist friends would say riveting the chains, of private property’. And later (19), he quotes a much earlier author who reports that in New Zealand a ‘form of tapu was a great preserver of property’, and an even earlier report (20) about the Marquand Islands where ‘without doubt the first mission of taboo was to establish property the basis of all society’.

Frazer also concluded (82) that ‘superstition rendered a great service to humanity. It supplied multitudes with a motive, a wrong motive it is true, for right action; and surely it is better for the world that men should be right from wrong motives than that they would do wrong with the best intentions. What concerns society is conduct, not opinion：if only our actions are just and good, it matters not a straw to others whether our opinions are mistaken’.





