The Ordering of the Unknown

The English language unfortunately lacks a popular word available in German：namely, Machbarkeit. I sometimes wonder whether a good cause might not be served by coining an equivalent English term ‘makeability’ – ‘manufacturability’ does not quite do (and my own ‘constructivism’ could hardly be rendered by ‘constructible’) – to describe the view that we have confronted, examined and contested throughout this chapter and the last：namely, that anything produced by evolution could have been done better by the use of human ingenuity.

This view is untenable. For in fact we are able to bring about an ordering of the unknown only by causing it to order itself. In dealing with our physical surroundings we sometimes can indeed achieve our ends by relying on the self-ordering forces of nature, but not by deliberately trying to arrange elements in the order that we wish them to assume. This is for example what we do when we initiate processes that produce crystals or new chemical substances (see previous section and also Appendix C). In chemistry, and even more in biology, we must use self-ordering processes in an increasing measure; we can create the conditions under which they will operate, but we cannot determine what will happen to any particular element. Most synthetic chemical compounds are not ‘constructible’ in the sense that we can create them by placing the individual elements composing them in the appropriate places. All we can do is to induce their formation.

A similar procedure must be followed to initiate processes that will coordinate individual actions transcending our observation. In order to induce the self-formation of certain abstract structures of inter-personal relations, we need to secure the assistance of some very general conditions, and then allow each individual element to find its own place within the larger order. The most we can do to assist the process is to admit only such elements as obey the required rules. This limitation of our powers necessarily grows with the complexity of the structure that we wish to bring into being.

An individual who finds himself at some point in an extended order where only his immediate environment is known to him can apply this advice to his own situation. He may need to start by trying continuously to probe beyond the limits of what he can see, in order to establish and maintain the communication that creates and sustains the overall order. Indeed, maintaining communication within the order requires that dispersed information be utilised by many different individuals, unknown to one another, in a way that allows the different knowledge of millions to form an exosomatic or material pattern. Every individual becomes a link in many chains of transmission through which he receives signals enabling him to adapt his plans to circumstances he does not know. The overall order thus becomes infinitely expansible, spontaneously supplying information about an increasing range of means without exclusively serving particular ends.

Earlier, we considered some important aspects of such processes of communication, including the market with its necessary and continual variation of prices. Here it need only be added and stressed that, beyond regulating current production of commodities and supplies of services, the same traditions and practices also provide for the future; their effects will manifest themselves not only as an interlocal order, but also as an intertemporal one. Actions will be adapted not only to others distant in space but also to events beyond the life expectancies of acting individuals. Only a confessed immoralist could indeed defend measures of policy on the grounds that ‘in the long run we are all dead’. For the only groups to have spread and developed are those among whom it became customary to try to provide for children and later descendants whom one might never see.

Some persons are so troubled by some effects of the market order that they overlook how unlikely and even wonderful it is to find such an order prevailing in the greater part of the modern world, a world in which we find thousands of millions of people working in a constantly changing environment, providing means of subsistence for others who are mostly unknown to them, and at the same time finding satisfied their own expectations that they themselves will receive goods and services produced by equally unknown people. Even in the worst of times something like nine out of ten of them will find these expectations confirmed.

Such an order, although far from perfect and often inefficient, can extend farther than any order men could create by deliberately putting countless elements into selected ‘appropriate’ places. Most defects and inefficiencies of such spontaneous orders result from attempting to interfere with or to prevent their mechanisms from operating, or to improve the details of their results. Such attempts to intervene in spontaneous order rarely result in anything closely corresponding to men’s wishes, since these orders are determined by more particular facts than any such intervening agency can know. Yet, while deliberate intervention to, say, flatten out inequalities in the interest of a random member of the order risks damaging the working of the whole, the self-ordering process will secure for any random member of such a group a better chance over a wider range of opportunities available to all than any rival system could offer.





