The Regional Character of the Problem

Another source of misunderstanding is the tendency to think of population growth in purely global terms. The population problem must be seen as regional, with different aspects in different areas. The real problem is whether the numbers of inhabitants of particular regions tend, for whatever reason, to outgrow the resources of their own areas (including the resources they can use to trade).

As long as an increase in population has been made possible by the growing productivity of the populations in the regions concerned, or by more effective utilisation of their resources, and not by deliberate artificial support of this growth from outside, there is little cause for concern. Morally, we have as little right to prevent the growth of population in other parts of the world as we have a duty to assist it. On the other hand, a moral conflict may indeed arise if materially advanced countries continue to assist and indeed even subsidise the growth of populations in regions, such as perhaps the Sahel zone in Central Africa, where there appears to exist little prospect that its present population, let alone an increased one, will in the foreseeable future be able to maintain itself by its own efforts. With any attempt to maintain populations beyond the volume at which accumulated capital could still be currently reproduced, the number that could be maintained would diminish. Unless we interfere, only such populations will increase further as can feed themselves. The advanced countries, by assisting populations such as that in the Sahel to increase, are arousing expectations, creating conditions involving obligations, and thus assuming a grave responsibility on which they are very likely sooner or later to default. Man is not omnipotent; and recognising the limits of his powers may enable him to approach closer to realising his wishes than following natural impulses to remedy remote suffering about which he can, unfortunately, do little if anything.

In any case, there is no danger whatever that, in any foreseeable future with which we can be concerned, the population of the world as a whole will outgrow its raw material resources, and every reason to assume that inherent forces will stop such a process long before that could happen. (See the studies of Julian L. Simon (1977, 1981a & b), Esther Boserup (1981), Douglas North (1973, 1981) and Peter Bauer (1981), as well as my own 1954:15 and 1967:208.)

For there are, in the temperate zones of all continents except Europe, wide regions which can not merely bear an increase in population, but whose inhabitants can hope to approach the standards of general wealth, comfort, and civilisation that the ‘Western’ world has already reached only by increasing the density of their occupation of their land and the intensity of exploitation of its resources. In these regions the population must multiply if its members are to achieve the standards for which they strive. It is in their own interest to increase their numbers, and it would be presumptuous, and hardly defensible morally, to advise them, let alone to coerce them, to hold down their numbers. While serious problems may arise if we attempt indiscriminately to preserve all human lives everywhere, others cannot legitimately object to an increase in numbers on the part of a group that is able to maintain its own numbers by its own efforts. Inhabitants of countries already wealthy hardly have any right to call for an ‘end to growth’ (as did the Club of Rome or the later production Global 2000), or to obstruct the countries in question, which rightly resent any such policies.

Some notions that attend such recommended policies for restricting population – for example, that advanced peoples should turn parts of the territories inhabited by still undeveloped people into a sort of nature park – are indeed outrageous. The idyllic image of happy primitives who enjoy their rural poverty and will gladly forego the development that alone can give many of them access to what they have come to regard as the benefits of civilisation is based on fantasy. Such benefits do, as we have seen, demand certain instinctual and other sacrifices. But less advanced people must decide for themselves, individually, whether material comfort and advanced culture is worth the sacrifices involved. They should, of course, not be forced to modernise; nor should they be prevented, through a policy of isolation, from seeking the opportunities of modernisation.

With the sole exception of instances where the increase of the numbers of the poor has led governments to redistribute incomes in their favour, there is no instance in history wherein an increase of population reduced the standards of life of those in that population who had already achieved various levels. As Simon has convincingly argued, ‘There are not now, and there never have been, any empirical data showing that population growth or size or density have a negative effect on the standard of living’ (1981a：18, and see also his major works on this subject, 1977 and 1981b).





