Tehanu

Tales from Earthsea

The Other Wind

AND LOOK FOR ADDITIONAL NOVELS FROM

URSULA K. LE GUIN





This book is a work of fiction. Any references to historical events, real people, or real locales are used fictitiously. Other names, characters, places, and incidents are products of the author’s imagination, and any resemblance to actual events or locales or persons, living or dead, is entirely coincidental.



ATHENEUM BOOKS FOR YOUNG READERS

An imprint of Simon & Schuster Children’s Publishing Division

1230 Avenue of the Americas, New York, New York 10020

www.SimonandSchuster.com

Copyright © 1972 by Ursula K. Le Guin

Copyright renewed © 2000 by Ursula K. Le Guin

Afterword copyright © 2012 by Ursula K. Le Guin

All rights reserved, including the right of reproduction in whole or in part in any form.

ATHENEUM BOOKS FOR YOUNG READERS is a registered trademark of Simon & Schuster, Inc.

Atheneum logo is a trademark of Simon & Schuster, Inc.

The Simon & Schuster Speakers Bureau can bring authors to your live event. For more information or to book an event, contact the Simon & Schuster Speakers Bureau at 1-866-248-3049 or visit our website at www.simonspeakers.com.

Also available in an Atheneum Books for Young Readers hardcover edition

Book design by Rachel Newborn

The text for this book is set in Adobe Garamond Pro.

This Atheneum Books for Young Readers hardcover edition September 2012

CIP data for this book is available from the Library of Congress

Library of Congress control number: 72075273

ISBN 978-1-4424-5992-2 (hardcover)

ISBN 978-1-4424-5993-9 (paperback)

ISBN 978-1-4424-8083-4 (eBook)

















Tehanu




PRAISE FOR THE EARTHSEA NOVELS BY URSULA K. LE GUIN

“Le Guin, one of modern science fiction’s most acclaimed writers, is also a fantasist of genius. . . . [Earthsea] is among her finest creations.”

—The New York Times

“Thrilling, wise, and beautiful . . . written in prose as taut and clean as a ship’s sail. Every word is perfect.”

—The Guardian

“Among the looms of fantasy fiction, Ursula K. Le Guin weaves on where J. R. R. Tolkien cast off. . . . Earthsea—fuming with dragons and busy with magic—has replaced Tolkien’s Middle Earth as the chosen land for high, otherworldly adventure.”

—Sunday Times (London)

“Readers will be beguiled by the flawless, poetic prose, the philosophy expressed in thoughtful, potent metaphor, and the consummately imagined world.”

—Kirkus Reviews

“A thoughtful, brilliant achievement.”

—Horn Book

“A treasure . . . It is at the top of any list of fantasy to be cherished.”

—award-winning science fiction and fantasy writer Andre Norton

“Stellar . . . Le Guin is still at the height of her powers, a superb stylist with a knack for creating characters who are both wise and deeply humane.”

—Publishers Weekly in a starred review for Tales from Earthsea

“Here there be dragons, and Ms. Le Guin’s dragons are some of the best in literature.”

—award-winning fantasy writer Robin McKinley,

The New York Times Book Review

“Richly told. . . . [Le Guin] draws us into the magical land and its inhabitants’ doings immediately.”

—Booklist

“Strong work from a master storyteller.”

—Library Journal

“All of Ursula Le Guin’s strengths are abundantly present . . . narrative power, tautly controlled and responsive prose, an imagination that never loses touch with the reality of things as they are.”

—The Economist

“Le Guin is not only one of the purest stylists writing in English, but the most transcendently truthful of writers.”

—The Nation

“Le Guin understands magic and dragons better than anyone, and her writing only gets better with each new book.”

—Michael Swanwick, author of Stations of the Tide








Only in silence the word,

only in dark the light,

only in dying life:

bright the hawk’s flight

on the empty sky.

—The Creation of Éa





