The Farthest Shore


PRAISE FOR THE EARTHSEA NOVELS BY URSULA K. LE GUIN

“Le Guin, one of modern science fiction’s most acclaimed writers, is also a fantasist of genius. . . . [Earthsea] is among her finest creations.”

—The New York Times

“Thrilling, wise, and beautiful . . . written in prose as taut and clean as a ship’s sail. Every word is perfect.”

—The Guardian

“Among the looms of fantasy fiction, Ursula K. Le Guin weaves on where J. R. R. Tolkien cast off. . . . Earthsea—fuming with dragons and busy with magic—has replaced Tolkien’s Middle Earth as the chosen land for high, otherworldly adventure.”

—Sunday Times (London)

“Readers will be beguiled by the flawless, poetic prose, the philosophy expressed in thoughtful, potent metaphor, and the consummately imagined world.”

—Kirkus Reviews

“A thoughtful, brilliant achievement.”

—Horn Book

“A treasure . . . It is at the top of any list of fantasy to be cherished.”

—award-winning science fiction and fantasy writer Andre Norton

“Stellar . . . Le Guin is still at the height of her powers, a superb stylist with a knack for creating characters who are both wise and deeply humane.”

—Publishers Weekly in a starred review for Tales from Earthsea

“Here there be dragons, and Ms. Le Guin’s dragons are some of the best in literature.”

—award-winning fantasy writer Robin McKinley,

The New York Times Book Review

“Richly told. . . . [Le Guin] draws us into the magical land and its inhabitants’ doings immediately.”

—Booklist

“Strong work from a master storyteller.”

—Library Journal

“All of Ursula Le Guin’s strengths are abundantly present . . . narrative power, tautly controlled and responsive prose, an imagination that never loses touch with the reality of things as they are.”

—The Economist

“Le Guin is not only one of the purest stylists writing in English, but the most transcendently truthful of writers.”

—The Nation

“Le Guin understands magic and dragons better than anyone, and her writing only gets better with each new book.”

—Michael Swanwick, author of Stations of the Tide









For Elisabeth, Caroline,

and Theodore





