D. THE “SPECIAL INTEREST” THEORY AND BUSINESS LOBBIES

The segment of society that has the largest number of lobbies working on its behalf is the business community. The Lobby lndex,32 an index of organizations and individuals filing reports under the Lobbying Act of 1946 and 1949, reveals that (when Indian tribes are excluded), 825 out of a total of 1,247 organizations represented business.33 Similarly, a glance at the table of contents of the Encyclopedia of Associations shows that the "Trade, Business, and Commercial Organizations" and the "Chambers of Commerce" together take up more than ten times as many pages as the "Social Welfare Organizations," for example.34 Most of the books on the subject

30. "One important structural difference exists between the AAUP and the AMA. The AMA performs two kinds of functions for its members. In addition to serving physicians in the capacity of a craft union, i.e., protecting and advancing their economic interest, it provides the services of an outstanding scientific- organization. For example, it publishes scientific journals, standardizes drugs, protects the public from harmful medicines, and provides a forum for scientific papers. The AAUP, on the other hand, has but one dimension: it is a craft union for college teachers. For scientific services its members look to the professional organizations serving their subject fields." Melvin Lurie, "Professors, Physicians, and Unionism," AAUP Bulletin, XLVIII (September 1962), 274.

31. As of January 1, 1965, the AAUP had 66,645 members. AAUP Bulletin, LI (March 1965), 54.
32. U.S. Congress, House, Select Committee on Lobbying Activities, Lobby Index,
1946-'19, Report No. 3197, 81st Cong., 2d Sess., 1950, H.R. 29.8.
33. Schattschneider, Semi-SovN"t:ign People (note 1, above), p. 30.

34. Encyclopedia r:,f Atsociations, 3rd ed. (Detroit: Gale Research Co.), I, 3. See also U.S. Department of Commerce, Directory of Trade Associations (Washington, 1956), p. iii; in addition see W. J. Donald, Trade Aswciations (New York: McGrawHill, 1933); Benjamin S. Kirsh, Trade Associations in Law and Business (New York:

agree on this point. "The business character of the pressure system," according to Schattschneider, "is shown by almost every list available." 35 This high degree of organization among businessmen, Schattschneider thinks, is particularly important in view of the fact that most other groups are so poorly organized: "only a chemical trace" of the nation's Negroes are members of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People; "only one sixteen hundredths of 1 per cent of the consumers" have joined the National Consumers' League; "only 6 per cent of American automobile drivers" are members of the American Automobile Association, and only "about 15 per cent of the veterans" belong to the American Legion.36 Another scholarly observer believes that "of the many organized groups maintaining offices in the capital, there are no interests more fully, more comprehensively, and more efficiently represented than those of American industry." 37 Burns and Peltason say in their text that "businessmen's 'unions' are the most varied and numerous of all." 38 V. 0. Key points out that "almost every line of industrial and commerical activity has its association." 39 Key also expresses surprise at the extent of the power of organized business in American democracy: "The power wielded by business in American politics may puzzle the person of democratic predilections: a comparatively small minority exercises enormous power." 40

The number and power of the lobbying organizations representing American business is indeed surprising in a democracy operating according to the majority rule. The power that the various segments of the business community wield in this democratic system, despite the smallness of their numbers, has not been adequately explained. There have been many rather vague, and even mystical, generalizations about the power of the business and propertied interests, but

Central Book Co., 1938); Clarence E. Bonnett, Employers' Associutions in the United States (New York: Macmillan, 1922) and Htstory of Employers' Associations in the United States (New York: Vantage Press, 1956); and Trade Associatinn Division, Chamber of Commerce of the United States, "Association Activities" (Washington, 1955), mimeo.
35. Schattschneider, Semi-Sot1ereign People, p. 31.
36. Ibid., pp. 35-36.

37. E. Pendleton Herring's comment in Group Representation before Congress (Washington: Brookings Institution, 1929), p. 78, which is quoted approvingly by McKean, pp. 485-486.
38. James MacGregor Burns and Jack Walter Peltason, Government by the People,
4th ed. (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1960), p. 293.
39. Key, p. 96.
40. Ibid., p. 83.

these generalizations normally do not explain why business groups have the influence that they have in democracies; they merely assert that they always have such an influence, as though it were self-evident that this should be so. "In the absence of military force," said Charles A. Beard, paraphrasing Daniel Webster, "political power naturally and necessarily goes into the hands which hold the property." 41 But why? Why is it "natural" and "necessary," in democracies based on the rule of the majority, that the political power should fall into the hands of those who hold the property? Bold statements of this kind may tell us something about the ideological bias of the writer, but they do not help us understand reality.

The high degree of organization of business interests, and the power of these business interests, must be due in large part to the fact that the business community is divided into a series of ( generally oligopolistic) "industries," each of which contains only a fairly small number of firms. Because the number of firms in each industry is often no more than would comprise a "privileged" group, and seldom more than would comprise an "intermediate" group, it follows that these industries will normally be small enough to organize voluntarily to provide themselves with an active lobbywith the political power that "naturally and necessarily" flows to those that control the business and property of the country. Whereas almost every occupational group involves thousands of workers, and whereas almost any subdivision of agriculture also involves thousands of people, the business interests of the country normally are congregated in oligopoly-sized groups or industries. It follows that the laboring, professional, and agricultural interests of the country make up large, latent groups that can organize and act effectively only when their latent power is crystallized by some organization which can provide political power as a by-product; and by contrast the business interests generally can voluntarily and directly organize and act to further their common interersts without any such adventitious assistance. The multitude of workers, consumers, white-collar workers, farmers, and so on are organized only in special circumstances, but business interests are organized as a general rule.42


41. Charles A. Beard, The Economic Basis of Politics (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1945), p. 103; see also McKean, p. 482.

42. The advantage in having a small number of large units in a group can be illustrated very simply by considering the extreme case of the very large firm with a


The political advantages of the small groups of large units-the business interests-may account for some of the concern about "special interests." As Chapter V pointed out, there may be a sense in which the narrow "special interests" of the small group tend to triumph over the (often unorganized and inactive) interests of "the people." Sometimes the contrast drawn between the "special interests" and the "people" is nothing more than a convenient rhetorical device for politicians and journalists. At other times, however, practical observers may be sensing the fact that the organized and active interest of small groups tend to triumph over the unorganized and unprotected interests of larger groups. Often a relatively small group or industry will win a tariff, or a tax loophole, at the expense of millions of consumers or taxpayers in spite of the ostensible rule of the majority. This is what the distinction between privileged and intermediate groups, on the one hand, and large, latent groups, on the other, would lead one to expect.

The main type of organization representing the business interests is the trade association, and it is not difficult to show how small and "special" the interests the trade associations represent are. Professor Schattschneider points out how few members most trade associations have:

Of 421 trade associations in the metal products industry listed in National Associations of the United States, 153 have a membership of less than 20. The median membership was somewhere between 24 and
50. Approximately the same scale of memberships is to be found in the lumber, furniture and paper industries where 37.3 per cent of the associations listed had a membership of less than 20 and the median membership was in the 25 to 50 range.

The statistics in these cases are representative of nearly all other classifications of industry.43

political interest unique to itself. Such a firm is a "group of one," and analogous to the monopoly or monopsony in the marketplace. When a large firm is interested in legislation or administrative regulations of unique importance to itself, there is little doubt that it will act in its interest. It is in an even more favorable position than the firms in the privileged group. In the case of the single large firm, the ordinary rules of the market tend to apply. Markets evolve. Washington is said to be host to numerous lawyers, former officials, and retired congressmen who are adept at helping individual businesses get what they want from the government. These services are provided for a fee: a market has developed. The language is a shibboleth of the fact that in this sphere of politics collective goods are not involved, and that an informal, sometimes shadowy, price system exists: consider the "influence peddler.'"
43. Schattschneider, Semi-Sovereign People, p. 32.

"Pressure politics," Schattschneider concludes, "is essentially the politics of small groups." 44 V. 0. Key points out that the effective or supporting membership of these trade associations is often much smaller than would be expected; "in almost half of them," he says, "nearly 50 per cent of the cost is borne by a handful of members."5 Thtradee associations are therefore normally rather small, and this smallness must be the principal reason that so many of them exist. Many of the trade associations, however, are able to derive still further strength because they provide some noncollective services for their members in addition to lobbying. They provide noncollective or nonpublic benefits the same way that many nonbusiness organizations do, and thus they have not only the advantage of being composed of rather small numbers of rather substantial or well-to-do business members, but in addition all the opportunities that other organizations have to provide a noncollective good to attract members. Many trade associations distribute trade statistics, provide credit references on customers, help collect bills, provide technical research and advisory services, and so on. Merle Fainsod and Lincoln Gordon list seventeen different functions which trade associations perform in addition to their political or lobbying duties.46 By performing these additional functions the trade associations offer a further incentive
to membership.

The disproportionate political power of the "special interests" or particular business interests should not, however, lead one to suppose that the whole business community necessarily has disproportionate power in relation to organized labor, the professions, or agriculture. Although particular industries normally have disproportionate power on questions of particular importance to themselves, it does not follow that the business community has disproportionate power when dealing with broad questions of national concern. For the business community as a whole is not well organized in the sense that particular industries are. The business community as a whole is not a
44. Ibid., p. 35.
45. Key, p. 96.

46. Merle Fainsod and Lincoln Gordon, Government and the American Economy, rev. ed. (New York: W. W. Norton, 1948), pp. 529-530. E. Pendleton Herring, in Group Representation before Congress, p. 98, describes the diverse functions of the trade associations thus: "The trade association has succeeded upon its merits. It fulfills a definite need in industry. There are so many matters in which cooperation is necessary and economic that a clearing house such as a trade association is considered desirable."

small privileged or intermediate group-it is definitely a large, latent group. As a result it has the same problems of organization as the other segments of society.

The two major organizations purporting to speak for business as a whole-the National Association of Manufacturers and the Chamber of Commerce of the United States-illustrate this point rather well. Neither of them has disproportionate power in relation to the AFL-CIO, the AMA, or the American Farm Bureau Federation. The Chamber of Commerce of the United States is only a "federation of federations." 47 Its principal members are the many local chambers of commerce and similar organizations around the country. These local chambers of commerce are normally small groups, and on that ground can normally organize with relative ease. They are made the more attractive to members by the fact that they are good places for businessmen to make "contacts" and exchange information. The Chamber of Commerce of the United States is built up from these local chambers of commerce on the principle of federation; but in the process of federation much of the strength is lost. The national organization provides various informational and organizational services to the local organizations, but nonetheless the individual member and even the individual local chamber of commerce are essentially only individual units in a latent group. They can make no decisive contribution to the success of the national organization, and will get the benefit of any achievements of the national organization whether they havo participated or not. A number of very large businesses will gain or lose so much from changes in national policy that they will find it expedient to make significant contributions-and the Chamber has found it necessary to sell special individual memberships to such large businesses.48 The money derived from big business, and a vague federal connection with the local chambers of commerce, can give the Chamber of Commerce of the United States a certain amount of power, but certainly not disproportionate power.

The National Association of Manufacturers is also based on the small group. It is in fact based on a single small group of very large businesses. Though nominally the NAM has a few thousand mem-
47. Burns and Peltason, p. 293.
48. McKean, p. 486.

bers, it is in practice supported and controlled by a handful of really big businesses. As Dayton McKean describes it: "The president of the Association is usually a small manufacturer of very conservative views, who serves for one or two years. The presidents of the giant corporations, which by general agreement dominate the Association because their concerns provide the funds by which it operates, do not serve as its president. About 5 per cent of the membership contribute about half the money." 49 About eight tenths of one per cent of the members of the NAM have held 63 per cent of all directorships.50 Although these few big businesses have made it possible for the NAM to spend as much as 5.5 million dollars per year for political purposes,51 they are still a small group, and are by no means more powerful than the major organizations representing labor, the professions, or the farmers. The NAM has not been successful in preventing the passage of measures it opposes, and its support of a cause is sometimes regarded as the "kiss of death." 52

The business community as a whole, which is certainly a large, latent group, is therefore not fully organized. It has two organizations that attempt to represent it, but these two organizations draw much of their support from a small group of giant businesses: they do not attract the direct support of the whole business community. A small group is powerful in matters relating to a particular industry, because then it is normally the only organized force, but it is less formidable when questions which divide the entire nation are involved, for then it must take on organized labor and other large organized groups. The business community in the aggregate is for this reason not uniquely effective as a pressure group.

The judgment that the "special interests"-the individual industry groups-have disproportionate power, though the business community as a whole does not, is apparently consistent with the general trend of current affairs. For it seems that particular interests do win tax loopholes, favorable tariffs, special tax rulings, generous regula-

49. Ibid., p. 489; Robert A. Bra<ly, Busineu as a System of I'ow,-r (New York: Columbia University Press, 1943), pp.211-212.

50. Alfred S. Clevelan<l, "NAM: Spokesman for Industry I" Harvard Business Review, XXVI (May 1918), 353-371.
51. Key, p. 100.
52. R. W. Gable, "NAM: Influential Lobby or Kiss of Death?"' /ournal of Politics,
xv (1953), 253-273.

tory policies, and the like, but that the business community as a whole has been unsuccessful in its attempts to stop the trend toward social-welfare legislation and progressive taxation.





