D. THE LOGIC OF GROUP THEORY

There is an inconsistency in the thinking of Commons, Bentley, Truman, Latham, and some of the pluralist and corporatist writers who have emphasized the pressures of the different economic groups. Many of these stimulating and important writers, especially Bentley, Truman, and Latham, have taken for granted that large economic groups working for their economic interests are absolutely fundamental in the political process. They have at times affirmed the existence of groups with something other than self-interested economic purposes, but still self-interested economic groups always play

55. Truman, pp. 515-516.

56. In a section on "Nostrums and Palliatives," Truman ridiculed the idea of the direct representation of the different economic interests in a "social parliament." In this he distinguished himself from J. R. Commons (who for all his faith in the
results of pressure-group activity had once advocated election of representatives from the different occupational groups) as well as from many of the guild socialist and corporatist writers in Europe. Of the recommendations for an occupationally rather than a territorially based parliament, Professor Truman said that "these proposals are worth noting ... because their recurrence shows how easily the political process may be misunderstood." There are many disadvantages to any system of functional representation and Professor Truman is right to bring these to mind. But the question remains whether or not he is right in assuming that, whatever the institutional arrangements, the needs of all groups in society will nonetheless tend to be reflected in effective political pressure and appropriate government policies. This same contentment about the wisdom and justice of the policies resulting from the equilibrium of group pressures also led Truman to be rather negative about proposals for the regulation of lobbying, for constitutional reforms, and for responsible political parties. (See Truman, pp. 524-535.)

the largest role in their writings.57 Professor Latham has been the most explicit on this point; for him self-interest is important, if not dominant, even in spiritual and philanthropic groups:

Groups organize for the self-expression and security of the members that comprise them. Even where a group is a benevolent, philanthropic association devoted to the improvement of material and spiritual fortunes of people outside its membership--a temperance or missionary organization, for example-the work toward this goal, the activity of the organization, is a means through which the members express themselves . . . The philanthropic organization devoted to good works often regards other agencies in the same field with a venomous eye. Councils of social agencies in large cities are often notorious for the rancor with which the struggle for prestige and recognition ( that is self-expression and security) is conducted one with the other.58

If the groups, or at least the economic groups, are often interested primarily in their own welfare, it could only be so because the individuals in these groups were primarily interested in their own welfare. So the "group theorists" under consideration here have committed themselves, usually implicitly and sometimes also explicitly, to the idea that, at least in economic groups, self-interested behavior is quite common. It can scarcely be emphasized too strongly that the analytical pluralists see the results of pressure-group activity as benign, not from any assumption that individuals always deal altruistically with one another, but rather because they think that the different groups will tend to keep each other in check because of the balance of power among them.

Here then is the logical failing in the analytical pluralists' treatment of economic groups. They generally take for granted that such groups will act to defend or advance their group interests, and take it for granted that the individuals in these groups must also be concerned about their individual economic interests. But if the individuals in any large group are interested in their own welfare, they will not voluntarily make any sacrifices to help their group attain its political (public or collective) objectives. Often the groups that the analytical pluralists expect will organize whenever they have any reason or incentive to do so are latent groups. Although in relatively small groups ("privileged" or "intermediate" groups) indi-
57. Truman, pp. 58-61; Bentley, pp. 210, 226-227, 462; Latham, p. 17.
58. Latham, pp. 28-29.

viduals may voluntarily organize to achieve their common objectives, this is not true in large or latent groups. It follows that the analytical pluralists, the "group theorists," have built their theory around an inconsistency. They have assumed that, if a group had some reason or incentive to organize to further its interest, the rational individuals in that group would also have a reason or an incentive to support an organization working in their mutual interest. But this is logically fallacious, at least for large, latent groups with economic interests.

Professor Truman developed a variant of the sociological theory of voluntary associations ( which was explained in Chapter I of this study) to buttress his assumption that groups of individuals will organize to protect their interests. But his variant of the sociological theory of voluntary organizations, like that theory itself, is insufficient. It is, like that theory, based on the mistaken belief that large groups could attract membership and support as easily as the small, primary groups that dominated primitive society. Previous chapters of this book argued that this assumption was logically untenable and moreover inconsistent with the available evidence. Because of the differences between small (privileged and intermediate) groups and large (latent) groups, there is no reason to suppose, as Truman does, that as problems that small primary groups cannot handle begin to emerge, large voluntary associations will arise to deal with those problems.

The distinction between the privileged and intermediate groups, on the one hand, and the latent group, on the other, also damages the pluralistic view that any outrageous demands of one pressure group will be counterbalanced by the demands of other groups, so that the outcome will be reasonably just and satisfactory. Since relatively small groups will frequently be able voluntarily to organize and act in support of their common interests, and since large groups normally will not be able to do so, the outcome of the political struggle among the various groups in society will not be symmetrical. Practical politicians and journalists have long understood that small "special interest" groups, the "vested interests," have disproportionate power. The somewhat too colorful and tendentious language with which the men of affairs make this point should not blind the scholar to the important element of truth that it contains. The small oligopolistic industry seeking a tariff or a tax loophole will sometimes attain

its objective even if the vast majority of the population loses as a result. The smaller groups-the privileged and intermediate groupscan often defeat the large groups-the latent groups-which are normally supposed to prevail in a democracy. The privileged and intermediate groups often triumph over the numerically superior forces in the latent or large groups because the former are generally organized and active while the latter are normally unorganized and inactive. The greater degree of organization and activity of small groups is not difficult to illustrate; the late V. 0. Key argued in his standard textbook that "the lobbyists for electrical utilities, for example, are eternally on the job; the lobbyists for the consumers of this monopolistic service are ordinarily conspicuous by their absence." 119 The conflict between the theory of analytical pluralism and the facts of political life is, however, somewhat obscured by the emphasis the analytical pluralists give to the "potential" (that is unorganized and inactive) group. The analytical pluralists generally, and Professor Truman particularly, emphasize the influence of the group that, even though unorganized and inactive, could and allegedly would organize and act if its interests were seriously threatened. The argument is that politicians know that a group, if its interest is seriously damaged or threatened, will organize and then wreak vengeance on its enemies. Therefore politicians will be almost as solicitous of the unorganized and inactive group as they are of the organized and active interest group. This contention is rather difficult to test empirically, because, if a group does not organize and act, the analytical pluralist can say that the damage to its interests
was not serious or that there was in fact no group interest.

Accordingly the analytical pluralists tend to belittle the importance of formal organization and other observable evidences of group action. "Organization," according to Professor Truman, "indicates merely a stage or degree of interaction." 60 Bentley did not think formal organization amounted even to that,61 and compared formal organization with the singing with which armies of old went into battle: it is merely a "technique" designed to improve the spirit and efficiency of the group that has little effect on the results.62 But would

59. V. 0. Key, Jr., Politics, Partiu, and Pressure Groups, 4th ed. (New York: Crowell, 1958), p. 166.
60. Truman, p. 36.
61. Bentley, pp. 434-446 and 463-464.
62. Ibid., p. 442.

not the comparison between a disciplined, coordinated army and an undisciplined, leaderless mob provide a better analogy to the difference between the organized and unorganized group? Practical politicians often emphasize the importance of "organization" and the power of the "machine." They would not often think of "lobbying" without a "lobby." The textbook writers in political science, moreover, discuss the achievements of organized pressure groups at great length, but they list few if any specific examples of the influence of unorganized groups.63
But even if the analytical pluralists should be correct in emphasizing the "potential" group and belittling the existing organization, their theory is still inadequate unless they can show how damage to a large group's interests-how an incentive for group organization and action-would necessarily provide an incentive or stimulus for the members of that large group to sacrifice their individual interests on behalf of the group goal. They must show why the individual member of the large, latent group will voluntarily support the group goal when his support will not in any case be decisive in seeing that the group goal is achieved, and when he would be as likely to get the benefits from the attainment of that goal whether he had worked for its attainment or not. The group theorists are on this point logically inconsistent. Their references to "potential" groups and their lack of concern for organization may blur the contrast between their theoretical conclusions and the facts of everyday observation, but they cannot negate the fact that their theories, insofar as they relate to large economic groups at least, are logically inconsistent.

The foregoing argument against the analytical pluralists also applies to John R. Commons' interesting view that the pressure groups' lobbies actually assembled in Washington are more "representative" than the territorially elected Congress is.64 The foregoing argument also damages, though it does not destroy, a few of the

63. See for example Key, pp. 21-177.

64. The theory presented here does not, however, weaken, and might even strengthen, the idea, expressed by Commons and some corporatist thinkers, that the parliament ought to be elected by each economic group. To the extent that the theory shows how different groups w0uld be unequally represented in a territorially elected legislature, it could be used to support a social or occupational parliament. But this theory destroys the corporatist idea that occupational groups naturally tend to form corporate organizations because of some spontaneous unity within them.

arguments of some of the older or "philosophical" pluralists and the advocates of a corporate organization of society. The various philosophical pluralists and the diverse advocates of corporatism mentioned at the beginning of this chapter differ a great deal among themselves and no one criticism can apply equally to them all. Their different theories are, moreover, almost all so broad the theory developed in this study can apply only to parts of them. Still, to the extent that the philosophical pluralists and the corporatists argue that any private organizations representing different occupational and industrial groups would have a firm foundation in the "natural unities of interest and function" of those groups, and that those groups could or would create "spontaneous and voluntary" organizations without the unnatural, coercive characteristics of the state, they are weakened by the theory developed in this study. Certainly the pluralist idea that the private group, even if it is rather large (and provides a collective service), can be natural, harmonious, and voluntary, and thus stand in contrast to the coercive state, is mistaken, however valuable other aspects of pluralist thought may be. The pluralistic view that private organizations spring up voluntarily and spontaneously in response to the needs, beliefs, and interests of the various groups has much in common with one aspect of the theory of anarchism. Many anarchists believed that once the existing, repressive, exploitive state was overthrown, a new, voluntary, natural unity would somehow emerge to take its place. As Bakunin saw it, "the political unity of the State is a fiction ...	it artificially produces discord where, without this intervention by the State, a living unity would not fail to spring up." 65 He continued, "When the states have disappeared, a living, fertile, beneficent unity of regions as well as of nations ...	by way of free federation from below upward-will unfold itself in all its majesty, not divine but human." 66 According to Prince Kropotkin, once the leading anarchist intellectual, a natural feeling that man should cooperate with his fellows for their "mutual aid" would ensure that after the anarchistic overthrow of the state a spontaneous and natural order would

65. Mikhail A. Bakunin, Bakunin: Scientific Anarchism, ed. G. P. Maximoff (Glencoe, Ill.: Free Press, 1953), p. 272.
66. Ibid., p. 273, also pp. 259, 293-300, 309. See also Paul Eltzbacher, Anarchism,
trans. Steven T. Byington (New York: Libertarian Book Club, 1960).

develop. "The sophisms of the brain," said Kropotkin, "can not resist the mutual-aid feeling." 67

The anarchistic assumption that in the absence of the oppressive state a natural, spontaneous unity would spring up to take its place is now regarded as evidence of hopeless eccentricity. The consistent critic of anarchism must, however, attack with equal force all of those who suppose that large groups will whenever the need arises voluntarily organize a pressure group to deal with the state, or a labor union to deal with an employer. Bentley, Truman, Commons, Latham, and many of the pluralist and corporatist thinkers are fully as guilty of the "anarchistic fallacy" as the anarchists themselves. The anarchists supposed that the need or incentive for organized or coordinated cooperation after the state was overthrown would ensure that the necessary organization and group action would be forthcoming. Is the view that workers will voluntarily support a trade union, and that any large group will organize a pressure-group lobby to ensure that its interests are protected by the government, any more plausible?

Because of the inconsistency, the anarchistic fallacy, in the prevailing (pluralistic) theory of pressure groups, this theory is not sufficient. The "group theory" that dominates the discussions of pressure groups is inadequate for large economic groups, at least, and there is accordingly a need for a new theory. It is to the development of such a theory that the next chapter will be devoted.

67. P. Kropotkin, Mutual Aid, A Factor of Evolution, rev. ed. (London: William Heinemann, 1904), p. 277.











