Appendix(added in 1971)


As the Preface indicates, this Appendix provides a brief survey of the articles I have written (or co-authored) that are related to this book, and a discussion of an idea for related research that others have proposed.

The articles to be considered here are of two different types. Those of the type we shall consider first were published in journals intended for my fellow economists and are accordingly stated in the specialized language of economics. Though they may seem forbidding at first sight to readers outside of economics, they should in fact be meaningful to any interested reader who has followed the argument of this book. Moreover, if these papers are correct, they (like other writings on collective goods) will have applications in diverse areas of the social sciences. Thus I hope that not only economists, but those in some other fields as well, will find them of interest. The articles of the second type, to which we shall turn later, were written with audiences of varied disciplinary backgrounds in mind, so that any uses they may have should be immediately evident on all sides.

The first of the articles at issue is entitled "An Economic Theory of Alliances,"1 and was written in collaboration with Richard Zeckhauser. It deals with the way in which members of a small group concerned with a collective good or externality should be expected to interact. It develops the argument that in most circumstances a small group interested in a collective good will provide a less than optimal supply of that good, and that there will also tend to be disproportionality in the sharing of the burdens of providing the good. The disproportionality is called the "exploitation of the great by the small" in this book. The book devotes only a few sentences to this disproportionality but the article develops a detailed model, applies it to real situations, and tests the predictions of the model against

1. Review of Economics and Statistics, XLVIII (August 1966), 266-279. This article is also reprinted, along with a part of this book, in Bruce Russett, ed., Economic Theories of lnttrnationaJ Politics (Chicago: Markham Publishing Company, 1968), pp. 25-50.

relevant data. Though the book also abstracts from "income effects," the article takes them fully into account.

The model elaborated in the article conflicts with Erik Lindahl's famous "voluntary theory of public exchange," and, to a lesser extent, with Leif Johansen's updated version of Lindahl's model,2 and can be used to demonstrate some significant defects in the LindahlJohansen approach. The Lindahl and Johansen formulations are not explicitly criticized in the article, but they are touched upon in a fuller version of the study which was published as a separate monograph.3 Though the applications and empirical tests in the article and the monograph relate only to international organizations and military alliances, the model can equally well be applied to other formal or informal groups containing limited numbers of members.

The theoretical literature on collective goods and externalities has tended to neglect not only the disproportionality of sacrifice explained in the study just described but also the degree of efficiency with which collective goods and externalities are generated or produced by different parties. Such differences in efficiency are often of decisive importance for public policy. In addition, the failure to take account of them has led some of the most skillful writers on the subject, particularly James Buchanan, Milton Kafoglis, and William Baumol, into logical confusion. That is demonstrated in "The Efficient Production of External Economies,"which I also wrote with Richard Zeckhauser. Our argument is stated much more fully, and applied to a practical situation, in "Collective Goods, Comparative Advantage, and Alliance Efficiency.""
Another aspect of the theory of collective goods that seems to have
been neglected in the literature is that involving what might be called their scope, domain, or clientele. Many writers implicitly assume that every collective good reaches everyone in the nation-state that provides it and no one outside that nation-state. In fact, some collective goods (such as pollution control in local airsheds, or neighborhood public parks) may have only a local impact, whereas others


2. Leif Johansen, "Some Notes on the Lindahl Theory of Determination of Public Expenditure," International Economic Review, IV (September 1963), 346-358.

3. Economic Theory of Alliances (Santa Monica, Calif.: The Rand Corporation, Rm 4297-ISA, 1966), esp. pp. 13-15.
4. American Economic Review, LX (June 1970), 512-217.

5. Roland N. McKean, ed., Ismes in Defense Economics, Universities-National Bureau Conference Series, N. 20 (New York: Columbia University Press, 1967).

(such as the unpatentable benefits of pure research or the benefits of an international organization) can sometimes virtually cover the earth. It is generally understood among economists that a government cannot usually be expected to provide collective goods at anything approaching an optimal level when the benefits of a collective good it is expected to provide fall in significant proportion outside its boundaries, because the government will find it in its interest to ignore those benefits that are spillovers to other jurisdictions and accordingly produce less of the good than is optimal. I have argued in an article0 on this subject that there is a similar but generally unrecognized problem when only a minority of the citizens in a jurisdiction would benefit from a collective good it could provide. If the jurisdiction is to provide collective goods to an optimal degree, it will provide those goods or projects that bring gains that are greater than their costs. But even a project that involves more gain than cost will leave more losers than gainers, if the gains go to a minority of those in the jurisdiction and the cost is covered through jurisdictionwide taxes. When a collective good reaches only a minority of those in a jurisdiction, then, it will not (in the absence of some lucky bargaining) get majority support, and will be provided, if at all, only to a less than optimal degree.
If there are problems when a jurisdiction is either too small to encompass all of those who benefit from its services or so large that a good proportion of its citizens do not benefit from some collective good it is expected to provide, then there is a case for a separate jurisdiction or government for every collective good with a unique catchment area or domain. There is, in other words, a need for what I have called "The Principle of 'Fiscal Equivalence'."7 The matter is, of course, far too complicated to justify policy conclusions on the basis of these considerations alone. Yet the arguments in the aforementioned article are sufficient to show that both the ideology that calls for thoroughgoing centralization of government and the ideology that calls for maximum possible decentralization of government are unsatisfactory, and that efficient government demands

6. "The Principle of 'Fiscal Equivalence': The Division of Responsibilities Among Different Levels of Government." American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings, LIX (Ma)" 1969), 479-487, republished in a slightly altered form in The Analysis and Evaluation of Public Expendit11res: The PPB System, vol. I, pp. 321-331, issued by the Joint Economic Committee, U.S. Congress, 91st Cong., 1st sess., 1969.
7. /hid.

many jurisdictions and levels of government. The arguments in this paper also help provide a framework for the analysis of some current proposals for decentralization of various urban services in large cities with segregated ghetto populations.

The types of collective goods and externalities with which governments have to deal are not only diverse in their scope and locale, but are presumably also becoming more numerous and important over time. As population, urbanization, and congestion increase, external diseconomies almost certainly increase too. For example, the farmer in a sparsely settled area who is careless about disposing of his garbage, or who has a noisy household, or who decides to go off to work just when everyone else does, creates no problems for anyone else, whereas the same behavior in a crowded city imposes costs on others. As economic development proceeds and technology becomes more advanced, it is probably also true that education and research become relatively more important, and many types of education and research appear to provide significant benefits to the society in addition to those for which the educated person or researcher is rewarded financially. Thus external economies may (though this is not certain) also be increasing in importance. In any event, the percentage of national output spent by governments in developed countries, to deal with what are at least perceived to be externalities and public goods, has greatly increased. I have accordingly argued, in two semipopular articles,8 that externalities and collective goods are evidently coming to have relatively greater importance in the United States (and perhaps other developed countries) as time goes on. If this argument is correct, it has three important implications that are relevant here.

First, it means that the number of problems requiring government action is increasing. This does not imply that the size of the public sector must soon grow beyond present levels, since governments may now do things that could better be left to the private sector. But it does mean that there has been a secular increase in what governments need to do, and that, if the apparent growth in the relative importance of externalities and collective goods continues, the burden that governments must ultimately bear will become even greater.


8. "The Plan and Purpose of a Social Report," Public Interest (Spring 1969), pp. 85-97, and "New Problems for Social Policy: The Rationale of Social Indicators and Social Reporting," International Institute of Labour Studies Bulletin (June 1970), pp. 18-40. These two articles cover approximately the same ground.


Second, an increase in the relative importance of collective goods and externalities means that the National Income and other measures of the National Product, though still extraordinarily useful, are becoming less satisfactory as measures of "welfare" or well-being. There is accordingly an increasing need for additional supplementary measures of "welfare" or "illfare," such as statistics on congestion, pollution levels, crime rates, health status, and so on. I have defined such measures of welfare or the "quality of life" as "social indicators." Most social indicators are measures of the volume or quantity (but not the money value) of an external economy (or diseconomy) or collective good (or bad). The uses of social indicators are explained in the two articles just cited, and illustrated in Toward A Social Report,9 a government document for which I had immediate responsibility during a period of service in government.

Third, an increase in collective goods and externalities can add to the amount of divisiveness and conflict in a society. This can be the case, I argued in another article,1because diverse wants or values with respect to a collective good are a basis for conflict, whereas different wants with respect to individual or private goods are not. Everyone in the domain of a given collective good must put up with about the same level and type of collective good, whereas with different tastes for private goods each individual can consume whatever mix of goods he prefers. If this argument is correct, it follows that the explanation of social cohesion or harmony offered by many sociologists, most notably Talcott Parsons, is unsatisfactory.

The contrast between my argument about conflict and cohesion, which was developed with the aid of the tools of economic theory, and the literature of the Parsonian type in sociology and political science, prompted me to make some more general points in the same article about the relationship between the economist's approach and that used in some other parts of social science. I argued that it is not primarily the objects of inquiry, but mainly the method and assumptions, that distinguish economics from the other social sciences. The
9. U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare, Toward A Social Report
(Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, Superintendent of Documents, 1969).

10. "Economics, Sociology, and the Best of All Possible Worlds," Public Interest (Summer 1968), pp. 96-118, republished with some additional material as "'The Relationship of Economics to the Other Social Sciences" in Seymour Martin Lipset, ed., Politics and the Social Sciences (New York: Oxford University Press, 1969), pp. 137-162.

economist's approach has been successfully applied not only to the workings of markets in modern Western societies, but also to fundamentally different societies and economic systems, and to problems of government, politics, and social status as well. Microeconomic theory is indeed relevant whenever behavior is purposive and there are not enough resources to achieve all purposes. Parsonian sociology is similarly general in its concerns, and often emphasizes the importance of its conclusions for the economic development of societies. The fact that modern economics and Parsonian sociology can be used to deal with some of the same problems, yet involve different methods and assumptions, makes it possible to show the contrast between the two approaches in practice. This leads to some fresh perspectives on some practical problems and at the same time exposes some methodological weaknesses in well-known works that have not always been evident before.11
The contrast between the modern economic and Parsonian sociological approaches has been developed, in a related and much fuller way, in a book by Brian Barry, a most lucid British writer. Barry's book on Sociologists, Economists, and Democracy12 compares a number of writers in the Parsonian sociological tradition with Anthony Down's Economic Theory of Democracy13 and with my Logic of Collective Action. Though Barry and I differ at several points, he finds a contrast in the methods and assumptions of the two approaches, and a level of generality in them, that is roughly consistent with what I observed.

There are many examples of concepts developed in one discipline that have been usefully applied to classical problems of another discipline. I would like to deal with one such example here, not merely because it illustrates the point that has just been made, but principally because it brings us to an approach to further research along the lines of this book that other writers have suggested.

This proposed approach emphasizes the role of the "entrepreneur." When Joseph Schumpeter developed the notion of the entrepreneur, he focused upon the businessman who did pioneering things as a


11. See either version of the article cited in the preceding footnote, and also "An Analytic Framework for Social Reporting and Policy Analysis," Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, CCCLXXXVlll (March 1970), 112-126.
12. Published both in New York and London by Collier-Macmillan in 1970.
13. New York: Harper and Brothers.

producer or seller of individual or private goods. Some recent writers, in discussions of the difficulty of providing collective goods for unorganized groups, have introduced the idea of the entrepreneur who might help a group obtain a collective good it lacked. One aspect of this notion was outlined by the economist Richard Wagner in his review article on this book,14 and other aspects have been independently developed and elaborated by Robert Salisbury15 and by Norman Frohlich and Joe Oppenheimer,16 and in a substantial book by the latter two writers and Oran Young.11 One could discuss the logical errors and invalid conclusions18 of this literature, but mistakes are commonplace in new areas of inquiry, and the more important task is to identify and underline the useful insight in these writings. One could also dwell upon the substantial differences among the works at issue, but this is again less significant than the fact that they all emphasize the role of the entrepreneur or leader who helps to organize efforts to provide collective good and tend to call him a ''political entrepreneur."

14. "Prcss,irc Groups and Political Entrepreneurs: A Review Article," Papers on Non-Market Decision Making, 1966, pp. 161-170. In this generous and stimulating article, Wagner emphasizes the point that, with appropriate democratic institutions and political leaders or entrepreneurs anxious to win votes, a large group may be able to obtain some consideration from the government even if the group is completely unorganized. So long as members of the group vote, political leaders may propose measures in the group's interest in order to win its votes. Thus consumers or farm laborers, for example, may get laws passed in their interest even without any powerful pressure group to lobby for them. This point is certainly correct. It is also perfectly compatible with the argument of the present book, which attempts to explain why some groups have the advantage of being organized and others do not, but does not go into the way a democratic political system can give some degree of representation to unor;;anizcd i:roups. The most casual observation of modern democracies, and particularly of the special interest legislation they have passed, makes clear that it matters a
_good deal whether a group is organized or not. The differences in the degree of organization among groups often lead to inefficiency as well as inequity. But Wagner is, of course, correct in emphasizing that even totally unorganized groups can have some impact on political decisions.
15. "An F.xchange Theory of Interest Groups," Midwest Journal of Political Science,
XIII (February 1969), 1-32.
16. "I Get By with a Little Help from My Friends," World Politics (October 1970),
pp. 104-120.

I 7. Political Leadership and Collective Goods (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1971).

18. The work of Norman Frohlich, Joe Oppenheimer, and Oran Young on this subject is in my opinion distinguished both by its stimulating and helpful qualities and also by some significant errors. The latter are most significant in the World Politics article cited above, but part of the responsibility for these rests with me and with other pre-publication critics for untimely or incorrect comments.


As I see it, an analysis of the role of the entrepreneur concerned with collected goods should begin with the special difficulty of providing such goods. The present book has hopefully shown that most groups cannot provide themselves with optimal amounts of a collective good, if any at all, in the absence of what the book calls "selective incentives." Those groups that can must be small enough for their members to have an incentive to bargain with one another. But it by no means follows that even the smallest groups will through the bargaining of their members necessarily obtain an optimal supply of a collective good. If the costs of bargaining are ignored, they will have an incentive to continue bargaining until they do achieve optimality. But individuals in the group will often also have an incentive to "hold out" for a time for a better bargain. Individual bargainers will often even have an incentive to threaten never to participate unless their terms are met, and a need to carry out the threat to maintain their credibility. In any event, the costs of bargaining cannot be ignored. The act of bargaining takes time. More importantly, the members of a group lose something every day that passes without their having an optimal supply of a collective good, and must in a world of positive interest rates discount the benefits of any optimal outcome in the future. Finally, the incentive the members of a small group would have to continue bargaining until in the long run they reach optimality may have little importance anyway, since in a changing world what is required for optimality will change from time to time, and then the bargaining may have to start all over again. For all of these reasons it will often be the case that even small groups will not have an optimal supply of a collective good, if any at all.

This means that a leader or entrepreneur, who is generally trusted (or feared), or who can guess who is bluffing in the bargaining, or who can simply save bargaining time, can sometimes work out an arrangement that is better for all concerned than any outcome that could emerge without entrepreneurial leadership or organization. If the entrepreneur senses that the outcome will be more efficient if each member of the group pays a share of the marginal cost of additional units of the collective good equal to his share of the benefits of each additional unit, and others do not sense this, the leader will (as is evident from pages 30 and 31 above) be able to suggest arrangements which can leave everyone in the group better off. If the situation

before the entrepreneur arises or intervenes is not optimal, it follows that the entrepreneur may also get something for himself out of the gains he brings about. Because of this gain, and the liking some people have for being leaders, politicians, or promoters, there is often an ample supply of political entrepreneurs. There is no certainty, and often not even a presumption, that an entrepreneur will sometimes be able to work out an arrangement that is agreeable to the parties concerned, and sometimes the difficulty and expense of striking the needed bargains will be too great for an entrepreneur to succeed, or even want to try.

When the group in need of a collective good is sufficiently large (i.e., is a "latent group"), an entrepreneur cannot possibly provide an optimal supply of the good through bargains or voluntary costsharing agreements with those in the group; indeed, he normally19 cannot in this way supply any of the good at all. As this book shows, no individual would have an incentive to contribute anything to the attainment of the collective good, whether through an entrepreneur or not, since an individual in such a large group would get only an infinitesimal share of any gain that resulted from his contribution. Thus either coercion or some reward that can be given only to those who contribute to the group effort (i.e., a "selective incentive") is needed to satisfy a large or latent group's need for a collective good. Because the departure from optimality is so large, and the number of people involved is so great, the gains that can be made from organizing a large group in need of a collective good are often enormous. Thus entrepreneurs will strive mightily to organize large groups. Many of the entrepreneurial efforts in this area, as in markets for private goods, will come to naught. But in some cases, as the sixth chapter of the present book indicates, imaginative entrepreneurs will be able to find or create selective incentives that can support a sizeable and stable organization providing a collective good to a large group. The successful entrepreneur in the large group case, then, is above all an innovator with selective incentives. Since large groups are often part of larger coalitions, and may contain many subgroups


19. For the one logically possible exception when there is rational behavior, see the long footnote on pages 48 and 49 of this book. I may be wrong, but the logical possibility outlined there seems to me to occur so rarely in practice, if it happens at all, that it is hardly wonh mentioning. I have called attention to this footnote again now because it anticipates one line of argument in some commentaries on this book.

within themselves, the entrepreneur in the large group will often also be a maker of bargains, just as he is in the case where there is only the small group.

In short, the incorporation of the concept of entrepreneurship in the provision of collective goods into the model developed in this book does not contradict its logic or invalidate its conclusions, but rather enriches the argument, and makes it a better tool for the study of organization leadership and change. Here, as is usually the case in science, the contributions of different authors are cumulative.





