D. GOVERNMENT INTERVENTION AND ECONOMIC FREEDOM IN THE LATENT GROUP

This approach to the unions and the rights or freedoms of their members can also clarify some of the popular arguments about the role of the government and the economic freedom of the citizen. There are many who argue that socialism and the growing activities

that labor unions do not increase the wage earners' share of the national income, yet may tend to promote inflation.

69. Of course:, when unions use the closed shop, not to bring members into the union, but to keep certain workers out of a particular kind of employment (because of race, personal bias, or whatever), then the: power of compulsion is not at all necessary to the survival of the union, and the foregoing arguments no longer apply. On the manifold legal complications posed in many countries by the naive assumption that unions arc voluntary associations, see R. W. Rideout, The Right to Membership of a Trade Union (University of London: Athlone Press, 1963).

70. Sec particularly Georg W. F. Hegel, Philosophy of Right, trans. T. M. Knox (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1949); sec also George H. Sabine, A History of Political Theory (New York: Henry Holt, 1937), who summarizes this aspect of Hegel's thought simply and briefly: "The state must be governed by principles quite different from those which govern its subordinate members" (p. 643). Aristotle, on the other hand, argued that the state has something in common with other types of organizations: "Observation shows us, first, that every polis (or state) is a species of association, and, secondly, that all associations arc instituted for the purpose of attaining some good ... We may therefore hold ... that all associations aim at some good." (Politics i.l.l.1252a, as translated by Ernest Barker.) The following books also find some parallel between the state and other associations: A. D. Lindsay, The Modem Democratic State (London: Oxford University Press, 1943), passim, but esp. I, 240- 243; Earl Latham, The Group Batis of Po/iti(:s (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1952), p. 12; and Arthur Bentley, The Proce11 of Go11emment (Evanston, Ill.: Principia Press, 1949), pp. 258-271.

92   The Logic of Coilective Action
of government will usually or inevitably restrict economic freedom, and perhaps threaten political rights as well.71 Others deny that the economic activities of the state in any way restrict "freedom," holding that freedom is essentially a political concept involving democracy and civil rights rather than economic policy.72

This controversy is often complicated by purely semantic misunderstandings and by confusions about what the exact areas of disagreement are. Thus it is necessary here to distinguish three aspects of the controversy.

One aspect has to do with the relationships between economic institutions and political liberties. Many conservative thinkers claim that a free, democratic political system can exist only as long as the role of the state in economic life is reasonably small; that socialism, government planning, and the welfare state will in the long run inevitably bring dictatorship on the Stalinist or Hitlerian models.73 Many others argue the reverse-that only bold government planning and liberal welfare measures will prevent the depression, distress,

71. Friederich A. Hayek, The Road to Serfdom (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1944), and The Constitution of Liberty (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1960); John M. Clark, "Forms of Economic Liberty and What Makes Them Important," in Freedom, Its Meanint, ed. Ruth Nanda Anshen (New York: Harcourt, Brace, 1940), pp. 305-329.

72. Sec Karl Mannheim, Freedom, Power, and Democratic Plannint (New York: Oxford University Press, 1950), esp. pp. 41-i7; Thomas Mann, "Freedom and Equality," in Freedom, Its Meanint, ed. Anshen, pp. 68-84; Joseph Rosenfarb, Freedom and the Administrative State (New York: Harper, 1948), pp. 74-84; John
R. Commons, Legal Foundations oj Capitalitm (Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1957), pp. 10-130.

Some other critics of the view that socialism and "big government" restrict freedom rely instead on a definition of freedom in terms of range of choice, or wealth, rather than in terms of freedom from coercion, thus enabling themselves to hold that any government activities that increase income for some class of people also could increase freedom, however coercive these government activities might be. Sec for example: John Dewey, "Liberty and Social Control," The Social Frontier, II (November 1935), 41-42; Denis Gabor and Andre Gabor, "An Essay on the Mathematical Theory of Freedom," Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, CXVII (1954), 31-60, and discussion on this paper, 60-72; Harold J. Laski, Liberty in the Modern State, 3rd ed. (London: George Allen & Unwin, 1948), esp. pp. 48-65; Bertrand Russell, "Freedom and Government," in Freedom, Its Meaning, ed. Anshen, pp. 249-265, esp. p. 251. For a perceptive and detached analysis of various concepts of freedom see Martin Bronfcnbrenncr, "Two Concepts of Economic Freedom," Ethics, LXV (April 1955),
157-170.

73. Hayek, Road to Serfdom. For a much more moderate argument expressing concern about this danger, sec Clark's essay in Freedom, Its Meaning, ed. Anshcn,
p. 306. See also Thomas Wilson, Modern Capitalism and Economic Progreu (London: Macmillan, 1950), pp. 3-19.

and disaffection that bring dictatorial governments in their wake.74 This aspect of the controversy is not relevant to this study.

Another aspect of the controversy over economic freedom has to do with the question of by whom and for what economic liberties are restrained. Many, perhaps most, thinkers would be very concerned about whether or not controls or limitations on individual freedom were imposed through a democratic election in the interests of the group involved, or whether they were imposed by a dictator or oligarchy that was not concerned about the interests of the group it controlled. Some would say that in the former case the "compulsion"
is not really compulsion, whereas in the latter case it is.75 This
distinction would emerge most clearly in the peculiar case of a group that voted unanimously to impose such a compulsory rule upon itself because if everyone followed the rule everyone would be better off. In this special case there would be no more infringement upon the freedoms of those involved than when two people freely sign a contract, which obviously restricts their freedom by legally compelling or forcing them to do some thing in the future. This case of absolutely unanimous support for compulsion would admittedly be altogether unusual. Nonetheless, in the more general situation where there is a majority vote, but not unanimous support, for some coercive measure in the group interest, most people would find this compulsion much less objectionable than the compulsion imposed by a dictator unmindful of the interests of his subjects. On the other hand, many others, especially laissez-faire enthusiasts, would argue that the economic tyranny of the majority in a democracy, or the benevolent paternalism of a political leader, is as much of an outrage against human freedom as any other form of compulsion.76 This aspect of the disagreement about economic freedom is very important, but it is not the aspect that is central to this study. The third and most fundamental aspect of the controversy about economic freedom involves economic liberty itself-freedom from
any coercive control of an individual's economic life, no matter what the political implications or political arrangements of such control

74. Albert Lauterbach, Economic Security and Individual Freedom (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1948), esp. pp. 5, 11, 12; Thomas Mann in Freedom, Its Meaning, ed. Anshen, pp. 80-81.

75. I am thankful to Professor Thomas C. Schelling for explaining the importance of this distinction and persuading me to discuss it in this study.
76. Hayek, Con1titution of Libmy.

might be.77 This aspect of the controversy over economic liberty is directly relevant to this study. There can be varying views about the importance of economic liberty in this strict sense-that is largely a matter of personal values-but not about its existence or reality.78 There is meaning to the idea of freedom to spend one's money as one likes, of "freedom of choice in the disposal of one's income," 79 though a great many think small changes in the amount of this freedom are not important.80
If it is granted that economic freedom in this third and most proper
sense is a meaningful concept, and that it is to some people at least an important concept, the next step is to analyze its relation to different degrees of government intervention in economic life. What types of government activity infringe upon economic freedom? Does the government's economic activity always rest on coercion? Or is it sometimes no more dependent on the use of force than private enterprise?

Here the concept of latent groups can be helpful. Some goods and services, it was shown, are of such a nature that all of the members of the relevant group must get them if anyone in the group is to get them. These sorts of services are inherently unsuited to the market mechanism, and will be produced only if everyone is forced to pay his assigned share. Clearly many governmental services are of this kind. Therefore they restrict freedom. They replace individual decisions made freely with collective decisions backed by force.81

77. Ibid., pp. 11-21. Here Hayek trenchantly and fairly shows the need to distinguish this concept of liberty from others that have lately been put forward. Sec also Isaiah Berlin, Two Concepts of Liberty (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1958).

78. See Bronfenbrenner, "Two Concepts of Economic Freedom," pp. 157-170. Even ardent advocates of governmental economic planning concede the importance of this type of freedom, e.g. Barbara Wooton, in Freedom under Planning (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1945). For a lengthy discussion of the need to distinguish the various meanings of the word "liberty" sec Maurice Cranston, Freedom, A New Analysis (London: Longmans, Green, 1953). Frank Knight surely goes too far in contending that no objective meaning can be given to the idea of freedom; sec his "Freedom as Fact and Criterion," International Journal of Ethics,
XXXIX (1929), 129-147.

79. Richard S. Thorn, "The Preservation of Individual Economic Freedom," in Problems of U.S. Economic Development, published by the Committee for Economic Development (New York, 1958).
80. Sec J. K. Galbraith, The Affluent Society (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1958).

81. On this subject see Anthony Downs, An Economic Theory of Democracy (New York: Harper, 1957), pp. 195-196. There would of course be no coercion if all decisions were unanimous.

Improvements in the defense forces, the police forces, and the judicial system at lea5t cannot be financed without in some sense reducing the economic freedoms of the citizenry, without increasing taxes and thereby reducing the individual's freedom to spend.

But if the government decides to form a public corporation to manufacture some product it is not clear that there necessarily has to be any reduction in anyone's economic freedom. The consumers are not necessarily any less free if they buy from a public rather than a private corporation; nor are the workers necessarily less free because they work for one rather than the other. The institutional arrangements have been changed to be sure, and the magnitude of the public sector is greater, but no one necessarily must have lost his economic freedom.

The conclusion is that when the government provides collective goods and services it restricts economic freedom; when it produces the noncollective goods usually produced by private enterprise it need not restrict economic freedom. But how paradoxical. For it is the financing of the traditional services of government-notably the army and the police, the defenders of the established order-that most restricts economic freedom; and it is the socialistic incursions into the private economy that need not do so. It is conservatives, who historically have advocated the most military spending, and who have more property in need of police protection, that restrict economic freedom, as well as the socialists.82 Of course, since governments normally have a monopoly on the major means of violence, they characteristically have the power to restrict the freedom of citizens whenever they want to, even when producing or distributing noncollective goods, or when undertaking any activity whatever. If, for example, a government distributes noncollective goods for free, it is reducing economic freedom.83 The point, however, is that the pro-

82. If some modern advocates of laissez faire can be accused of imprecision when they discuss economic freedom, the same cannot be said of Wicksell. His plan for "unanimous consent" for government expenditures attacked the real problem, the collective services, rather than the size of the governmental sector. In his day government spending was concentrated almost exclusively on the military forces, and on the maintenance of domestic order and tranquility. The adoption of his plan would perhaps not have limited the sphere of the government's activities; it would merely have enforced more economical and perhaps more pacific national policies (Wicksell opposed Sweden's heavy expenditure on armaments and her bellicose attitude toward Russia). See Gardlund's Life of Wick.sell.
83. Liberal or left-wing pro!)<l)sals to restrict the production of certain products also

v1s10n of the public goods traditionally provided by government inevitably entails a limitation of economic freedom, while the government-owned socialistic enterprise producing noncollective good does not necessarily entail any such loss of freedom. It is therefore possible that the widespread belief that the growth of the governmental sector is equivalent to a decline in economic freedom owes something to the association of all governmental activity wtih the traditional governmental services, and particularly with the higher taxes and conscription required for a larger military establishment.84

The foregoing argument is not meant to label any government activity good or bad; it is intended instead to show that it is the provision of collective goods and services, not the public or private nature or other characteristics of the institutions that provide these services, that largely determines whether economic freedom must be curtailed. The growth of cartels capable of disciplining firms that undercut established prices restricts economic freedom, even though the cartels are private associations. Similarly, if the main argument of this chapter is correct, the development of collective bargaining for large groups must normally restrict economic freedom in that it implies that those who do not join the union must be deprived of the right to work in the unionized enterprise. In other words, the large labor union, though not a part of the government, must be coercive, if it attempts to fulfill its basic function and still survive. This is largely because its basic function is to provide a collective good-collective bargaining-to a large group, just as the basic function of government is to provide traditional collective goods like law, order, and defense. On the other hand, a government (or a labor union or any other organization) can provide noncollective goods without restricting economic freedom. There are of course many

limit economic freedom, but so do effective private cartels. And the nationalization of an industry, though it need not affect the freedom of the workers and managers in that industry, or the consumers of the industry's product, could, if the government prohibited private competition, restrict the freedom to become an entrepreneur in that particular industry. But this freedom would not affect many people, and then only if the government prohibited competition.
On the effects of nationalization on economic freedom see Wooton, passim.

84. For psychological, anthropological, and sociological approaches to the problem of liberty, see Erich Fromm, Escape from Freedom (New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston, 1941); and George C. Homans, The Human Group (New York: Harcourt, Brace, 1950), pp. 332-333.

other important factors that have not been considered here that also help to determine how much economic freedom there will be in any given situation; the subject is much more complex than the present discussion would indicate. It would take this study far from its central theme to do justice to this profound problem. Yet it is already evident that the conventional creed which says that unions should not have the power of coercion because they are private associations, and that the expansion of the public sector inevitably entails the loss of economic freedom, is based on an inadequate understanding. No analysis of the limits of economic freedom or the uses of coercion by government, labor unions, or organizations of any kind can do justice to the complexity of the subject without taking account of the distinction between collective and noncollective goods.





