A. THE PHILOSOPHICAL VIEW OF PRESSURE GROUPS

Just as Marxians glorify and magnify class action, many nonMarxian scholars glorify and magnify the pressure group. Many well-known scholars, especially in the United States, enthusiastically endorse or contentedly accept the results of pressure-group activity, and scoff at the journalists and casual observers1 who worry about the power of pressure groups. The scholars who praise the pressure groups differ considerably among themselves. Still there is perhaps a common element in the views of most of them; they tend to write approvingly of the functions that the pressure groups fufill and of the beneficial effects of their activities. Many of them contend that the pressure groups generally counterbalance one another, thus ensuring that there will not be a result unduly favorable to one of them and unjustly harmful to the rest of the society.

It would be difficult to trace exactly the development of the view that pressure groups are generally beneficial, or at least benign. But one type of thinking that has probably helped create an intellectual climate favorable to the growth of this view is that known as "pluralism." Pluralism, to be sure, deals with much more than pressure groups: indeed it deals with them only tangentially. It is the political philosophy which argues that private associations of all kinds, and especially labor unions, churches, and cooperatives, should have a larger constitutional role in society, and that the state should not have an unlimited control over the plurality of these private associations. It opposes the Hegelian veneration of the nation state, on the one hand, but fears the anarchistic and laissez-faire individual-


I. See Robert Luce, Legislatit1e Assemblies (Boston: Houghton Mifllin, 1924); Stuart Chase, Democracy Under Pressure: Special Interests t1s. the Public Welfare (New York: Twentieth Century Fund, 1945); Robert Brady, Business as a System of Power (New York: Columbia University Press, 1943); Kenneth G. Crawford, The Pressure Boys (New York: Julian Messner, 1939).

istic extremes, on the other, and ends up seeking safety in a society in which a number of important private associations provide a cushion between the individual and the state.2

Pluralism tends to create a mood favorable to pressure groups (even though that is not its principal purpose) primarily because it emphasizes the spontaneity, the liberty, and the voluntary quality of the private association in contrast with the compulsory, coercive character of the state.8 The pluralist political theorist, A. D. Lindsay, put it this way:

The common life of society is lived by individuals in all manner of social relationships--churches, trade unions, institutions of all kinds. The religious, the scientific, the economic life of the community develop through these. Each has its own development. There is in them a sphere of initiative, spontaneity, and liberty.

That sphere can not be occupied by the state with its instruments of compulsion [italics mine].4
The pluralists inherited this view in part from two famous legal scholars, Otto von Gierke of Germany and F. W. Maitland of England.6 These two scholars were primarily concerned with the legal

2. Francis W. Coker, "Pluralism," Encyclopaedia of the Social Sciences, XII (New York: Macmillan, 1934), 170-173; M. P. Follett, The New State--Group Organization the Solution of Popular Government (New York: Longmans, Green, 1918); Harold Laski, A Grammar of Politics, 4th ed. (London: George Allen & Unwin, 1939),
pp. 15-286; Sir Ernest Barker, Political Thought in England, 1848-1914 (London: Oxford University Press, 1947), pp. 153-160 and 221-224, and Principles of Social and Political Theory (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1951), pp. 47-88. More recently a new, sociological type of pluralist theory has contended that a multitude of political groups besides the state are necessary if a society is to avoid susceptibility to "mass movements" like Nazism and Communism. See William Kornhauser, The Politics of Mass Society (Glencoe, Ill.: Free Press, 1959), and Harry Eckstein, A Theory of Stable Democracy (Princeton, N.J.: Center of International Studies, Princeton University, 1961). I am indebted to a conversation with Professor Talcott Parsons for the suggestion that this variety of sociological thinking should be regarded as a new type of pluralism.
3. "The pluralist regards these [ voluntary associations J . . as im pl) mg respect
for the independence and initiative of 'spontaneous' economic, profession, and local groups which correspond to 'natural' unities of interest and function." Coker in Encyclopaedia of the Social Sciences, XII, 172. See also Francis Coker, Recent Political Thought (New York: Appleton-Ccmury-Crofts, 1934), pp. 497-520.
4. A. D. Lindsay, The Modem Democratic State (London: Oxford University Press,
1943), I, 245.

5. Otto van Gierke, Political Theories of the Middle Age, translated with an introduction by F. W. Maitland (Cambridge, Eng.: Cambridge University Press, 1900), and Natural Law and the Theory of Society, 1500--1800, translated with an introduc-

difficulties that resulted when private associations were not given "legal personality"-the status of units bearing legal rights and duties-and they found in medieval thought and practice a view of organized groups or associations which emphasized their spontaneous origin and organic unity and which they thought a proper basis for modern legal thinking. The view that the private organization was an independent, voluntary, spontaneous outgrowth was further strengthened by several scholars who, though not always pluralists, nonetheless shared the enthusiasm for the voluntary association. John Dewey, the American social critic, was one of these.0 And in French corporate thought there was a somewhat pluralistic emphasis on the private association. Joseph Paul-Boncour, later a French prime minister, argued that the history of professional or occupational associations showed that in all ages and countries such groups had arisen spontaneously and had in time become a decisive force in their industry or occupation.7 Emile Durkheim, the great French sociologist, was, like Paul-Boncour, something of a "corporatist" in that he believed in the sociologically natural causes and psychologically desirable effects of a network of occupationally organized associations, and wanted a system of government in which such groups played a much larger role.8

The idea of the "corporate state"-a government organized around representation and administration through industrial-occupational groups rather than through territorial divisions-has perhaps some similarity to the view that pressure groups should, because of their beneficial effects, play a larger role. The corporate state theory has

tion by Ernest Barker (Cambridge, Eng.: Cambridge University Press, 1950); F. W. Maitland, "Moral Personality and Legal Personality," in Maitland-Selected Essays, ed. H. D. Hazeltine, G. Lapsley, and P. H. Winfield (Cambridge, Eng.: Cambridge University Press, 1936), pp. 223-239.

6. John Dewey, The Public and Its Problems, 3rd ed. (Denver: Allan Swallow, 1954), pp. 22-23, 26-27, 28-33, 72-73, and 188.

7. Joseph Paul-Boncour, Le FMeralisme economique; etude sur les rapports de l'individu et des groupement; professionnels (Paris: Felix Akan, 1900), and Reflections of the French Republic, trans. George Marion, Jr. (New York: Robert Speller & Sons, 1957), I, 40 and 138-147.

8. Emile Durkheim, Le Suicide (Paris: Felix Akan, 1897), and The Division of Labor in Society, trans. George Simpson (Glencoe, Ill.: Free Press, 1947), esp. pp. 1-31. Sec also Mathew H. Elbow, French Corporative Theory, 1789-1948 (New York: Columbia University Press, 1953), pp. 100-118. For an English politician's view of the need for an occupational or "social" parliament, see L. S. Amery, Thoughts on the Constitution (London: Oxford University Press, 1953), pp. 64-69.

been popular for a long while on the continent, and especially in France, where one version of it has been supported by many Roman Catholic groups-it has been encouraged officially by the Vatican9- as well as by President Charles de Gaulle.10 The emphasis on political organization on a functional or occupational-industrial basis rather than on a geographic basis was of course also characteristic of some varieties of syndicalist and fascist thought, and was to a degree put into practice in fascist Italy and Vichy France.11



