E. GOVERNMENT PROMOTION OF POLITICAL PRESSURE


The most striking fact about the political organization of farmers in the United States is that there has been so little. Farmers have not on the whole been well organized, except perhaps in recent years. And what organization the farmers have had has tended to be unstable. Many farm organizations have come and gone, but only a few have come and stayed.

There was no lasting, significant farm organization or lobby in this country until after the Civil War,63 though farmers were the largest group in the population throughout the early history of the country. The first farm organization worth mentioning was the Grange-the Patrons of Husbandry. The Grange was started in 1867, and in the first few years of its life it spread like a prairie fire across the plains of the country.64 It had very soon acquired an impressive membership and a considerable amount of power. But the Grange soon collapsed as fast as it had grown. By the 1880's it was already insignificant.56 The Grange has survived with a small membership to the present day, but has never regained the power and glory of its youthful years. Indeed, the precipitous decline it suffered apparently affected the spirit as well as the body of the Grange, for since then it has generally avoided controversial economic or political issues. It has become to a great degree a social organization, and is no longer an aggressive pressure or lobbying organization, though it does some low-keyed lobbying.156

The remarkable achievement of the Grange is that it has managed to survive at all, when so many other farm organizations formed since it began have passed away. The Farmers' Alliances, the Greenback movement, the Free Silver movement, the Agricultural


53. Fred A. Shannon, American Farmers' Movements (Princeton, N.J.: D. Van Nostrand, 1957), pp. 8-48.
54. Ibid., pp. 54-57; Charles M. Gardner, The Grange-Friend of the Farmer
(Washington, D.C.: National Grange, 1949), pp. 3-12.
55. Solon J. Buck, The Agrarian Crusade (New Haven, Conn.: Yale University
Press, 1920), pp. 60-76.
56. Gardner, passim; David Lindstrom, American Farmers' and Rural Organizations
(Champaign, Ill.: Garrard Press, 1948), p. 177.

Wheel, the Gleaners, Populism, the Equity, the Brothers of Freedom, and other such organizations died within a few years of their birth.57 This indeed has been the general pattern.

The Farmers Union and the Farm Bureau are the two distinct exceptions to that pattern. But these two organizations also have had their difficulties. The Farmers Union, the older of the two, was started in Texas in 1902.58 During its early years it acquired a significant membership in the South. This membership was lost after the First World War and the organization nearly succumbed to this tragedy.59 The organization began a new life in the Great Plains states during the interwar years, but its membership in this period was very small. In the late 1930's and in the 1940's the Farmers Union built a firmer base of support in the states of the Missouri Valley, however, and it is from this region that it presently draws most of its strength.60

The Farm Bureau, which is now the largest of the farm organizations, and the only one with a nationwide membership, was from the very beginning completely different from other farm organizations. For the Farm Bureau was created by the government. The SmithLever Act of 1914 provided that the federal government would share, with the states, the cost of programs for providing what has come to be called "county agents," who furnish farmers information on improved methods of husbandry developed by the agricultural colleges and agricultural experiment stations.61 Many of the state governments decided that no county could receive any government money for a county agent unless it organized an association of farmers that would be evidence of an interest in getting more information on modern agricultural methods. These county organizations came to be called "Farm Bureaus."62 They were the beginning of the Farm Bureau movement that exists today. There were, it is true, a

57. Carl C. Taylor, The Farmers' Movement, 1620-1920 (New York: American Book Co., 1953), passim.

58. Theodore Saloutos, Farmer Movement! in the South, 1865-1933 (Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1960), pp. 184-212.
59. Lindstrom, p. 208; Taylor, pp. 335-364.

60. Key, p. 43; Theodore Saloutos and John D. Hicks, Agricultural Di1content in the Middle West, 1900-39 (Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1951), pp. 219- 254.

61. Gladys L. Baker, The County Agent (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1939), pp. 36-40.
62. Ibid., p. 16.

handful of these county Farm Bureaus a year or two before the government started providing money for county agents,63 but these were so few in number that they were totally insignificant, and they were in any case like the county Farm Bureaus started by the government in that their purpose was simply to obtain better information on agricultural methods.64

The expenditure of government funds for "extension work," that is for the county agents, increased greatly during World War I, so the number of county Farm Bureaus naturally increased pari passu. These county Farm Bureaus, normally under the guidance of the county agent ( who often had to maintain the Farm Bureau in his county or else lose his job), soon combined to form statewide Farm Bureaus. These state organizations in turn formed a national organization, the American Farm Bureau Federation, in 1919.65

Up to this time the Farm Bureau was, first, a quasi-official organization, set up in response to financial incentives provided by government, and second, an organization that provided individualized or noncollective benefits to its members. The second point is especially important. The farmer who joined his county Farm Bureau got technical assistance and education in return. The farmer who joined was normally put on the mailing list for technical publications: the farmer who did not join was not. The farmer who joined had first call on the county agent's services: the farmer who did not, normally had last call, or no call at all. A farmer thus had a specific incentive to join the Farm Bureau. The dues he had to pay were an investment (and probably a good investment) in agricultural education and improvement.
Under the stimulus furnished by the increasing government expenditures on agricultural extension work, the membership of the county and state Farm Bureaus, and therefore of the American Farm Bureau Federation, increased very rapidly. By 1921, the Federation had a membership of 466,000.66 In the next year, however, the membership was considerably less, and it continued to fall more or less steadily until 1933, by which time it was only 163,000.67

63. Orville Merton Kile, The Farm Bureau Movement (New York: Macmillan, 1921), pp. 94-112.
64. Ibid., pp. 94-112.
65. Ibid., pp. 113-123; Grant McConnell, The Decline of Agrarian Democracy
(Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1953), pp. 44-54.
66. McConnell, p. 185.
67. Ibid., p. 185.


At the very time that its membership was falling, there was every reason to suppose that the value of the services the Farm Bureau was providing to farmers was increasing.68 The Farm Bureau was taking on new functions. It had helped create the powerful "farm bloc" and was bringing the passage of much legislation that was popular among (and helpful to) the farmers. At the same time, with the help of the county agents, it was promoting a number of cooperatives designed to bring savings to farmers. Why then did the membership of the Farm Bureau continue to fall? The answer, almost certainly, is that, as the Farm Bureau took on these new functions, it naturally increased the competition of the political and business organizations already in the field. The result was that the nation began to notice that the Farm Bureau was at once a pressure group, and a (cooperative) business organization, subsidized by public funds. The situation was so anomalous that it naturally stimulated a negative reaction. The criticism led to the "True-Howard" agreement, which restricted the extent to which the county agent could work for the Farm Bureau organization or for Farm Bureau members alone.69 The county agent was no longer supposed to "organize farm bureaus or similar organizations, conduct membership campaigns, solicit memberships, receive dues, handle farm bureau funds, edit and manage the farm bureau publications," and so on.70 Though the extent to which the government could subsidize the Farm Bureau was then limited, these subsidies were not stopped altogether. The county agents continued to assist the farm bureaus, but they did so less regularly and less conspicuously as time went on.71

It was presumably this limitation on the amount of help that the county agent could give the farm bureaus that accounted for the decline in membership at the very time the organization was expanding its programs. As it became more convenient for farmers who were not members of the Farm Bureau to get the technical help of the county agent, and as it became harder for the farm-bureau organization to obtain the governmentally subsidized labor of the county agent, the incentive to join the Farm Bureau decreased.
This decline in the membership of the Farm Bureau Federation
68. Kile:, Farm Bureau Movement, pauim.

69. Orville: Mrrton Kile, The Farm Bureau Through Three Decades (Baltimore: Waverly Press, 1948), pp. 110-111.
70. Ibid., p. 110.
71. William J. Block, The Separation of the Farm Bureau and the Extension Service
(Urbana. Ill.: University of Illinois Press, 1960).

came to a halt in 1933. In this year the Roosevelt administration began a vast program of aid to agriculture under the Agricultural Adjustment Act. To get the program off to a rapid start, that administration had to rely on the only nationwide administrative system that had any experience with agriculture-the Agricultural Extension Service, with its county agents in every county. The county agents then took over the task of administering the programs that controlled how much farmers could plant, how much they had to plow down, and how large their subsidy checks were. This development naturally favored the Farm Bureau, and increased its membership.72 Although stories of county agents sending farmers their government checks in the same envelopes in which they sent bills for Farm Bureau dues73 are no doubt exceptional, there can be no question that, at a time when the county agent was the channel through which the farmer got both his government aid and his agricultural education, it was often expedient to join the county agent's organization: the Farm Bureau. Accordingly, in this period the Farm Bureau enjoyed a moderate increase in its membership, though it failed to reach the level of membership it had enjoyed in 1921.74

Later in the 1930's the Farm Bureau lost this particular source of strength. The Farm Bureau had cooperated wholeheartedly with the New Deal agricultural program and Secretary of Agriculture Henry Wallace in the first few years of the Roosevelt administration, but this cooperation became more difficult as time went on. The Roosevelt administration soon set up an administrative system independent of the county agent to administer the Agricultural Adjustment Act. A new federal hierarchy was created, and in each county this federal administrative machine was helped by "farmer-elected committeemen." These commmitteemen were farmers who were elected by their neighbors to help administer the farm program in the county, and who worked part time in the pay of the government. The establishment of this new administrative system not only weakened the county agent, and therefore the Farm Bureau; it also set up what inevitably became, especially during the Truman administration, another farm organization. The farmer-elected committeemen were

72. Ibid., pp. 15-16.

73. Sam B. Hall, The Truth About the Farm Bureau (Golden, Colo.: Golden Bell Press, 1954), pp. 10-12.
74. McConnell, p. 185.

in constant touch with the Department of Agriculture, and they soon began to form, along with their friends and neighbors, a subtle but relatively influential farm organization that often opposed the Farm Bureau.711



