C. MODERN THEORIES OF PRESSURE GROUPS—BENTLEY, TRUMAN, LATHAM

It is not among economists, but rather among political scientists, that the opinion of pressure groups which Commons held is the most common. For political scientists have evolved a theory of group behavior strikingly similar to that which Commons advocated. The idea that group interests are absolutely fundamental determinants of economic and political behavior is accepted by many, perhaps most, political scientists. As Earl Latham pointed out in his book The Group Basis of Politics, "American writers on politics have increasingly accepted the view that the group is the basic political form." 21 Professor Latham himself holds to this view: "It has been pointed out, and repeated, that the structure of society is associational. Groups are basic . . . What is true of society is true of the . . . economic community." 22

The parallelism between Commons' thinking on group behavior in economics and politics and the trend of thought in political science can easily be illustrated. Professor Latham illustrates this parallelism most clearly:

The concept of the group ... has been helpful in bringing to economics a knowledge of the human institutions through which men dig coal, make soap and battleships, create credit, and allocate the resources of production. Commons, Veblen, Clark, Andrews, and other pioneers in the empirical study of such economic group forms as banks, corporations, granges, unions, cooperatives, railroads, brokerage houses, and exchanges did much to rectify the notion that some objective law, heedless of men, somehow filled each purse to the exact limit justified by the contribution of its owner to the total of the goods and services of society. The economic theory of a century ago fixed the nature of the economic universe by definition and tended to derive its characteristics by deduction, an economic world inhabited by a multiplicity of individuals in isolation, where combination was a pathological deviation. Such a defined (not observed) universe could not fail to work-in the realm of discourse. So far have we come from this view that a whole new vocabulary has been invented to explain the operations of an economic community formed of aggregations, clusters, blocs, and combinations of

Power (London: Hamish Hamilton, 1952), esp. chap. x, "Countervailing Power and the State," pp. 141-157.

21. Eul Latham, The Group Basis of Politics (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1952), p. 10; see also David B. Truman, The Governmrntal Process (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1958), pp. 46-47.
22. Latham, p. 17.

people and things-not individuals in isolation. Few modern writers on economics would be able to discuss their subject matter without reference to "oligopoly," "imperfect competition," "monopolistic competition," and other group phenomena in the economic community.23

What is significant in this quotation is not the neglect of the fact that monopolistic and imperfect competition alike are in fact based on assumptions fully as individualistic as perfect competition, but rather the belief that group interests and group behavior are the primary forces in economic as well as in political behavior. The essence of this tradition in political science seems to be that one looks to group interests rather than to individual interests to see the basic forces at work in both the economy and the polity. For Commons and Latham alike, group interests are dominant, individual interests secondary.

Latham quite plausibly emphasizes the close connection between the "group theory" of modern American political science and the tradition of pluralism. The original pluralist thinkers, the "philosophical pluralists," are credited with understanding "the group basis of society, both in its political and economic communities." 24 While the original pluralists are praised for seeing the fundamental and inevitable character of economic and political action on behalf of group interests, they are chided for failing to examine the group's "forms, mutations, and permutations in a scientific spirit." 25 The modern political scientists, since they deal with the plurality of group forms, should also be called pluralists, but because of their "scientific" and theoretical rigor the adjective "analytical" should be added to distinguish them from the original or "philosophical" pluralists.26 All of the modern "group theorists," then, are "analytical pluralists," and it is by this name that they shall be known in this study.

The most important of the "modern" or "analytical" pluralists was Arthur F. Bentley, for it is his book, The Process of Government,27 that has inspired most of the political scientists who have

23. Ibid., pp. 4-5.
24. Ibid., p. 8.
25. Ibid., p. 9.
26. Ibid., p. 9.

27. Arthur F. Bentley, The Process of Government (Evanston, Ill.: Principia Press, 1949). Although this book was first published in 1908, and thus is contemporaneous with many of the original or "philosophical" pluralist writings, its approach is completely in harmony with modern political science.

followed the "group approach." 28 His book, probably one of the most influential in American social science, is partly an attack on certain methodological errors that had troubled the study of politics, but mostly a discussion of the dominant role that pressure groups play in economic and political life.

The economic aspect was very important to Bentley. He had previously written about economic history, and considered himself for much of his life an economist.29 Wealth, he thought, was the main source of group division in society.30 Apparently he turned to the study of pressure groups primarily because of his interest in economic affairs. "I will say," he wrote in The Process of Government, "that my interest in politics is not primary, but derived from my interest in economic life; and that I hope from this point of approach ultimately to gain a better understanding of economic life than I have succeeded in gaining hitherto." 31

His idea that group pressure was the basic force was not, however, confined to the economic sphere, though that was apparently the most important. "The great task in the study of any form of social life is the analysis of these groups," he contended; "when the groups are adequately stated, everything is stated. When I say everything, I mean everything." 32 It was group interests, moreover, that were basic. "There is no group without its interest. An interest, as the term will be used here, is the equivalent of a group." 33 These group interests were to be found by empirical study. Bentley thought that no "interest" could be considered to exist unless it manifested itself in group action.

Whereas group interests were everything, individual interests were nothing. What mattered were the common interests of groups of people, not the losses and gains to single individuals. "The individual stated for himself, and invested with an extra-social unity of his own, is a fiction. But every bit of the activity, which is all we

28. Truman, p. ix; Latham, p. 10; Robert T. Golembiewski, "'The Group Basis of Politics': Notes on Analysis and Development," American Political Science Review, LIV (December 1960), 962; William J. Block, The Separation of the Farm Bureau and the Extension Service (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1960), p. 2.

29. Myron Q. Hale, "The Cosmology of Arthur F. Bentley," American Political Science Rei-iew, LIV (December 1960), 955.
30. Bentley, p. 462.
31. Ibid., p. 210.
32. Ibid., pp. 208-209.
33. Ibid., p. 211; italics mine.

know of him, can be stated either on the one side as individual, or on the other side as social group activity. The former statement is in the main of trifling importance in interpreting society; the latter statement is essential, first, last, and all the time." 34 Just as the idea of the individual interest was a fiction, so was the idea of the national interest. All group interests pertained to groups comprising only a part of a nation or society.35 "Usually we shall find," wrote Bentley, "on testing the 'social whole,' that it is merely the group or tendency represented by the man who talks of it, erected into the pretense of a universal demand of the society." 36 This situation was logically necessary in Bentley's model, since he defined groups in terms of their conflict with one another, and thought that "no interest group has meaning except with reference to other interest groups." 37

By defining group interests in terms of their conflict with one another, thereby excluding the idea of an interest of society as a whole, Bentley was then able to say that the resultant of the group pressures was the one and only determinant of the course of government policy. "Pressure, as we shall use it, is always a group phenomenon. It indicates the push and resistance between groups. The balance of group pressures is the existing state of society." 38 Government, in Bentley's theory, was "considered as the adjustment or balance of interests." 39 Now the outline of the model is evident. By assuming that there are no effective individual interests, that every group has its interests, that these interests always result in group action, and that there is no one group interest that includes everyone in society, Bentley was able to claim that all things involving government, all things great and small, are determined by the conflicting group pressures.40 This was the key to understanding government in general and economic policy in particular.
34. Ibid., p. 215; see also pp. 166-170 and 246-247.

35. "The 'state' itself is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, no factor in our investigation. It is like the 'soc,al whole': we a.re not interested in it as such, but exclusively in the processes within it." Ibid., p. 263; see also pp. 217-222, 271, 422, 443-444, and R. E. Dowling, "Pressure Group Theory: Its Methodological Range," American Political Science Review, LIV (December 1960), 944-954, and esp. 944-948.
36. Bentley, p. 220; for a similar view see Truman, p. SI.

37. Bentley, p. 271; he also says that the "activity that reflects one group, however large it may be, always reflects the activity of that group against the activity of some other group" (p. 240).
38. Ibid., pp. 258-259.
39. Ibid., p. 264.

40. Bentley went all the way with his model. Everything that mattered in the control of social and economic policy could fit into the model of conflicting group


Not only was the resultant of all the group pressures always the determinant of social policy, but it was also, in Bentley's mind, for the most part a reasonably just determinant. Groups had a degree of power or pressure more or less in proportion to their numbers. The larger, more nearly general, interest would usually tend to defeat the smaller, narrower, special interest. He considers a situation in which a relatively small group of team owners with heavy wagons are tending to damage the public roads in a town to the detriment of the majority of the taxpayers and citizens in the town. Bentley asserts that eventually the interest of the larger number will win out over the special interests of the minority: the mass of taxpayers is "bound to win" eventually and require wider tires for the teamsters'
.vagons, despite the fact that many in the majority may not even be aware of the controversy.41 This result was typical. "The greater proportion of the detail of government work . . . is composed of habitual actions which are adjustments forced by large, united weak interests upon less numerous, but relatively to the number of adherents, more intense interests. If there is anything that could probably be meant by the phrase 'control by the people' just as it stands, it is this." 42 Legislatures, he concedes, were at times working quite imperfectly, but when special interests got too large a hand, a hue and cry arose against them.43 The logrolling of special interests was not to be feared: it was an excellent, efficient device for adjusting group interests.44

pressures. Differences in the quality of political leadership? This was mainly the result of different group patterns. If a group leader was weak, it meant that there were quarreling subgroups within the group he was attempting to lead. The type of government? Group pressures would triumph, whether there was dictatorship, constitutional monarchy, oligarchy, or democracy. Even the most powerful dictator was a mediator among groups, the army, the church, the landowners, or whatever; even the slaves' interests had their effect on the outcome. The separation of powers? Group pressures would determine the outcome however the government was organized, though each different agency or part of the government was itsdf a group with an interest of its own which would in turn affect the balance of pressures. Even the judicial decisions could be understood in terms of group pressures. The extent of the franchise? A group would have power whether or not it had the vote. Whether women were enfranchised mattered little, for if they were not they would still affect the resultant of group pressures through the family, an important subgroup.
41. Bentley, pp. 226-227.
42. !bid., p. 454.
43. !bid., pp. 454-455.

44. "Log-rollling is, however, in fact, the most characteristic legislative process. When one condemns it 'in principle,' it is only by contrasting it with some assumed pure public spirit which is supposed to guide legislators, or which ought to guide


For all his emphasis on the importance and beneficence of group pressures, Bentley said very little about why the needs of the different groups in society would tend to be reflected in politically or economically effective pressure. Nor did he consider carefully what it is that causes groups to organize and act effectively. Or why some groups are important in some societies and other groups important in other societies and periods.45 Bentley's disciples, however, have attempted to fill this gap in his thinking.

David Truman, in his well-known book The Governmental Process, has given particularly careful attention to this lacuna in Bentley's book. Essentially Professor Truman tried to develop a variant of the sociological theory of voluntary associations to show that organized and effective group pressures will emerge when necessary.46 As a society becomes more complex, Truman argued, and its group needs become more numerous and varied, it will naturally
tend to form additional associations to stabilize the relationships of the various groups in the society. With more specialization and social complexity, more associations are needed, and more will arise, because it is a basic characteristic of social life that associations emerge to satisfy the needs of society.

With an increase in specialization and with the continual frustration of established expectations consequent upon rapid changes in the related techniques, the proliferation of associations is inescapable [ italics mine]. So closely do these developments follow, in fact, that the rate of association formation may serve as an index of the stability of a society, and their number may be used as an index of its complexity. Simple societies have no associations ( in the technical sense of the term); as they grow more complex, i.e., as highly differentiated institutionalized groups increase in number, societies evolve greater numbers of associations.47
This "inescapable" increase in the number of associations will inevitably have its impact on government. The associations will acquire

them, and which enables them to pass judgment in Jovian calm on that which is best 'for the whole people.' Since there is nothing which is literally best for the whole people, group arrays being what they arc, the test is useless, even if one could actually find legislative judgments which are not reducible to interest-group activities. And when we have reduced the legislative process to the play of group interests, then log-rolling, or give and take, appears as the very nature of the process. It is compromise ... It is trading. It is the adjustment of interests." (Ibid., pp. 370-371.)
45. See however his pp. 460-464.
46. Truman, pp. 23-33, 39-43, and 52-56.
47. Ibid., p. 57.

connections with the institutions of government whenever government is important to the groups in question.48 This tendency for associations to arise to fill the needs of the groups in society is especially evident in the economic sphere.

There are, undoubtedly, a number of reasons for the prevalence of associations growing out of economic institutions ... There has been a series of disturbances and dislocations consequent upon the utopian attempt, as Polanyi calls it, to set up a completely self-regulating market system. This attempt involved a policy of treating the fictitious factors of land, labor, and capital as if they were real, ignoring the fact that they stood for human beings or influences closely affecting the welfare of humans. Application of this policy inevitably meant suffering and dislocation-unemployment, wide fluctuation in prices, waste, and so forth. These disturbances inevitably produced associations-of owners, of workers, of farmers-operating upon government to mitigate and control the ravages of the system through tariffs, subsidies, wage guarantees, social insurance and the like.49 [Italics mine.]

Truman then appears to contend that "suffering," "dislocation," and "disturbance" will almost inevitably result in organized political pressure. Those disadvantaged groups that need an organization will in fact come to have an organization. But the facts of recent political life do not necessarily substantiate this view. By Truman's standard, more associations should have been formed during the industrial revolution (when there was a great deal of "suffering" and "dislocation"). But, as he points out, the rate at which associations have been formed has been highest in recent years50 ( which have been mainly prosperous and stable).
Apart from this attempt to amend Bentley's theory (by adding an
48. Ibid., pp. 52, 55.

49. Ibid., p. 61. Truman also gives the rapid rate of technical change in modern industry part of the credit for the preponderance of economic associations.

50. Ibid., pp. 55, 60. By Truman's theory, the major national British labor unions should have begun during the Industrial Revolution, not in the placid period after l 850, and American unions should have grown most during the tumultuous years of industrial change after the Civil War, or from 1929 to 1933, not before and during the two world wars. Admittedly, the legal environment was possibly also a factor; British unions, for example, were outlawed during part of the Industrial Revolution. Admittedly also Truman is persuasive in finding that discontent and disaffection are greatest during periods of economic dislocation; I have committed myself to a similar argument in "Rapid Growth as a Destabilizing Force," /ournal of Economic History, XXIII (December 1963), 529-552. The trouble with Truman's theory here is that it assumes organized groups arise because there is a dislocation or "need" for them, and this is neither factually nor theoretically substantiated.

explanation of why group needs and interests would result in organized political pressure), Truman tended to follow every twist and turn in Bentley's account. Truman, like Bentley, neglected individual interests; group interests, group attitudes, and group pressures were the only things that mattered.51

Truman not only shared Bentley's belief that group pressures alone determined the final equilibrium position of the social system, but was, if anything, even less qualified in his belief that this group equilibrium tended to be just and desirable.52 There were two main reasons for Professor Truman's benign view of the results of pressure-group politics. He thought, in the first place, that most pressure groups would be weak and divided in those circumstances in which they asked for too much from society, since their members also had "overlapping" memberships in other groups with different interests and would thus tend to oppose excessive demands. Tariffseeking manufacturers were also consumers, churchmen, and so on, so that if the manufacturers' association went too far it would alienate some of its own members.53 Moreover, in the second place, there were "potential groups" that would arise and organize to do battle with the special interests if the special interests got far out of line.54 If the tariff proposed was excessive, presumably the consumers would organize a lobby that would oppose it. And the very existence


51. Truman also resembled his master in his neglect of the all-inclusive social or national interest. "In developing a group interpretation of politics," he commented on p. 51, "we do not need to account for a totally inclusive interest, because one does not exist."

52. It does not follow that the results of pressure-group activity would be harmless, much less desirable, even if the balance of power equilibrium resulting from the multiplicity of pressure groups kept any one pressure group from getting out of line. Even if such a pressure group system worked with perfect fairness to every group, it would still tend to work inefficiently. If every industry is favored, to a fair or equal degree, by favorable government policies obtained through lobbying, the economy as a whole will tend to function less efficiently, and every group will be worse off than if none, or only some, of the special-interest demands had been granted. Coherent, rational policies cannot be expected from a series of separate ad hoc concessions to diverse interest groups. For a related argument, see Peter H. Odegard, "A Group Basis of Politics: A New Name for an Ancient Myth," Western Political Quarterly,
XI (September 1958), 700.
53. Truman, pp. 506-516.

54. This idea is now apparently so widely accepted that it is passed on to the young in the textbooks almost without qualification. See James MacGregor Burns and James Walter Peltason, Government by the People, 4th ed. (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1960), pp. 310--311.

of these potential groups, and the fear that they would organize, keeps the organized interests from making excessive demands.

Thus it is only as the effects of overlapping memberships and the functions of unorganized interests and potential groups arc included in the equation that it is accurate to speak of governmental activity as the product or resultant of group activity ... To assert that the organization and activity of powerful interest groups constitutes a threat to representative government without measuring their relation to and the effects upon the widespread potential groups is to generalize from insufficient data and upon an incomplete conception of the political process.65
So confident was Professor Truman of the generally salutory effects of group pressures that he belittled almost all attempts to improve the system of legislation and lobbying.H





