C. THE LOGIC OF THE MARXIAN THEORY

It is not in fact true that the absence of the kind of class conflict Marx expected shows that Marx overestimated the strength of rational behavior. On the contrary, the absence of the sort of class action Marx predicted is due in part to the predominance of rational
utilitarian behavior. For class-oriented acti<>n will n<>t occur if the individuals that make up a class act rationally. If a person is in the
bourgeois class, he may well want a government that represents his


22. All of these quotations are from C. Wright Mills, White Collar (New York: Oxford University Press, 1951), pp. 325-328. Talcott Parsons also argues that Marx was basically a utilitarian; see "Social Classes and Class Conflict in the Light of Recent Sociological Theory," in his Essays in Sociological Theory, rev. ed. (Glencoe, Ill.: Free Press, 1954), p. 323.

class. But it does not follow that it will be in his interest to work to see that such a government comes to power. If there is such a government he will benefit from its policies, whether or not he has supported it, for by Marx's own hypothesis it will work for his class interests. Moreover, in any event one individual bourgeois presumably will not be able to exercise a decisive influence on the choice of a government. So the rational thing for a member of the bourgeoisie to do is to ignore his class interests and to spend his energies on his personal interests. Similarly, a worker who thought he would benefit from a "proletarian" government would not find it rational to risk his life and resources to start a revolution against the bourgeois government. It would be just as reasonable to suppose that all of the workers in a country would voluntarily restrict their hours of work in order to raise the wages of labor in relation to the rewards for capital. For in both cases the individual would find that he would get the benefits of the class action whether he participated or not.23 (It is natural then that the "Marxian" revolutions that have taken place have been brought about by small conspiratorial elites that took advantage of weak governments during periods of social disorganization. It was not Marx, but Lenin and Trotsky, who provided the theory for this sort of revolution. See Lenin's What Is to Be Done24 for an account of the communist's need to rely on a committed, selfsacrificing, and disciplined minority, rather than on the common interests of the mass of the proletariat.)
Marxian class action then takes on the character of any endeavor
to achieve the collective goals of a large, latent group. A class in Marxist terms consists of a large group of individuals who have a common interest arising from the fact that they do or do not own productive property or capital. As in any large, latent group, each individual in the class will find it to his advantage if all of the costs or sacrifices necessary to achieve the common goal are borne by others. "Class legislation" by definition favors the class as a whole


23. John R. Commons has also made this mistake; sec "Economists and Class Partnership," in his collection of essays entitled l.Abor and Administration (New York: Macmillan, 1913), p. 60.

24. V. I. Lenin, What ls to Be Done (New York: International Publishers, 1929); see also Edmund Wilson, To the Finland Station (New York: Harcourt, Brace, 1940),
pp. 384-404. Crane Brinton has shown that the major revolutions, communist or otherwise, were carried out by strikingly small numbers of people; sec The Anatomy of Revolution (New York: Random House, n.d.), pp. 157-163.

rather than particular individuals within the class and thus offers no incentive for individuals to take "class-conscious" action. The worker has the same relation to the mass of the proletariat, and the businessman has the same relation to the mass of the bourgeois, as the taxpayer has to the state, and the competitive firm to the industry. The comparison of the Marxian class to the ordinary large economic group or organization is not at all far-fetched. Marx at times restricted the term "class" to organized groupings: "In so far as the identity of their interests does not produce a community, national association, and political organizations-they do not constitute a class." 211 Marx also emphasized the importance of the trade union and the strike to the class action of the proletariat. Marx and Engels describe the process of proletarian action this way in the Communist
Manifesto:

The collisions between individual workmen and individual bourgeois take more the character of collisions between the two classes. Thereupon the workers begin to form combinations (Trades' Unions) against the bourgeois; they club together in order to keep up the rate of wages; they found permanent associations in order to make provision beforehand for these occasional revolts. Here and there the contest breaks into riots.

Now and then the workers are victorious, but only for a time. The real fruit of their battles lies, not in the immediate result, but in the ever expanding union of the workers.26

But the workers who would start the opening round of the class struggle by forming a union to raise wages must face the fact that it is not in the interest of the individual worker to join a union for such a purpose.27 The crux of the matter, then, is that Marx's theory
25. Quoted in Dahrendorf, p. 13.

26. Communist Manifesto, pp. 68-69. Many students think the growth of unions lessens the chances of a communist revolution, since this growth institutionalizes strife and tends to keep it within bounds, Communist revolutions have been most successful in countries where there were not strong unions. See Seymour Martin Lipset, Political Man (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1960), pp. 21-22.

27. Marx on occasion appeared to recognize this problem, but his answer to it is hardly very clear, as the following quotation suggests: "Large-scale industry concentrates in one place a crowd of people unknown to each other. Competition divides their interests. But the maintenance of wages, this common interest which they have against their boss, unites them in a common thought of resistance combination ... combinations, at first isolated, constitute themselves into groups ... and, faced with always united capital, the maintenance of the association becomes more necessary to them than that of wages ... In this struggle-a veritable civil war-are united and

of social classes is inconsistent insofar as it assumes the rational, selfish pursuit of individual interests. When the class-oriented action Marx predicted does not materialize, it does not indicate that the economic motivation is not predominant, as some of his critics imply, but rather than there are no individual economic incentives for class action. Many of those who criticize Marx as though he were logically consistent but psychologically unrealistic are not only giving Marx's theory credit for a consistency it may not have, but are also wrong in assuming that apathy and the absence of the degree of class action that Marx expected are due to the lack of rntional economic behavior: they could logically be due to its strength.

This is not to deny that a theory of irrational behavior leading to class action might in certain cases be of some interest. Class differences resulting from sociological factors might lead individuals irrationally and emotionally to act in a class-oriented way.28 A theory of class action that emphasized emotion and irrationality, rather than the cold and egotistical calculation Marx often emphasized, would be at least consistent, Marx was unfortunately not a precise writer, and there is uncertainty about what he actually meant, and so it is conceivable that he could have had such an irrational, emotional, and psychological theory of class action in mind, rather than the rational, economic, and utilitarian theory of class action that is normally ascribed to him. This is conceivable, but perhaps unlikely, for if Marx had wanted to develop such a theory he would have been logically obliged to emphasize the sincere, selfless sublimation of individual interests in favor of class-oriented action. He would have had to argue that the individual bourgeois were so unselfish and

developed all the elements necessary for a coming battle. Once it has reached this point, association takes on a political character." This passage, from The Poverty of Philosophy, was also quoted and empliasized by Lenin; sec his essay on "Karl Marx," in Karl Marx, Selected Works in Two Volumet, prepared by the Marx-Engels-Lenin Institute, Moscow, under the editorship of V. Adoratsky (New York: International Publishers, n.d.), I, 48-50.
28. Such a sociologically determined, irrational class attitude might nonetheless be
influenced by the economic position of the class; economic conditions can affect social attitudes. But this fact does not destroy the distinction between such a sociologically oriented class theory and one that assumes that class action is due to (imagined) individual incentives for class-conscious action. On the influence of class on American political behavior see Samuel Lubell, The Future of American Politics (New York: Harper, I952), passim, but especially circa p. 59, and his Revolt of the Moderates (New York: Harper, 1956), pp. 103-120; V. 0. Key, Politics, Partiu and Pre.,m.-c Groups, 4th ed. (New York: T. Y. Crowell, 1958), pp. 269-279.

dedicated that they would neglect their individual interests to further the goals of their class. But, as explained above, this was hardly Marx's position. He emphasized individual selfishness and bourgeois calculation at every opportunity. He even defined classes in terms of property relationships, and therefore economic interests.29 And he gave little or no attention to the sociological and psychological processes by which an irrational, emotional class consciousness might develop. For these reasons Marx probably did not have only a theory of irrational and uneconomic class action in mind.30

Much of the evidence suggests instead that Marx was offering a theory based on rational, utilitarian individual behavior. And if so his


29. On the other hand, Marx in some places seems to sense the fact that individual interests do not provide a basis for the organized class action that he proclaimed as the decisive force in history. Sec his comments about competition among the workers and among the bourgeois breaking down the unity of each class in the Communist Manifesto, especially p. 69, as well as in his other writings. Sec also the quotation from Marx's "ldeology-'Saint Max'" quoted in Lipset, Political Man, pp. 24-25. Marx also gives great emphasis to the derivation of moral ideas from the class position. Sec Friederich Engels, He" Eugen Duhririg's Revolution in Science (AntiDuhring), trans. Emile Burns (New York, 1939), pp. 104-105. In this connection the apparent tendency for revolutionary movements to draw their adherents from those with the weakest class tics should be noticed; some scholars contend that those who are dcclasse, or "alienated" from the major groups of their society, are the most apt to turn to radical religious or political movements like communism, the John Birch Society, and the like. Sec Eric Hoffer, The True Believer (New York: New American Library, 1958), and William Kornhauser, The Politics of Mass Society (Glencoe, lll.: Free Press, 1959), pp. 14-15. Sec also Erich Fromm, Escape from Freedom (New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston, 1960), and David Riesman, The
Lonely Crowd (New York: Doubleday Anchor, 1956).

30. There is some possibility that Marx had neither a theory of rational nor a theory of irrational behavior in mind, but was merely putting forward an unempirical, metaphysical assertion derived from Hegel's dialectical philosophy. Marx again and again referred to the importance of dialectical reasoning for an understanding of social phenomena, and said that he had found Hegel's dialectic standing on its head and had turned it right side up. The essence of history is an inexorable movement by which one ruling class replaces another, just as each thesis has its antithesis. To the extent that Marx's theory of class conflict has such a metaphysical basis, it frustrates any criticism of the sort above; for if replacement of one ruling class by another inevitably is brought about by some immanent force in history, it matters not whether the rational pursuit of self-interest of the persons in the different classes can bring this about; the dialectical movement of historical change will ensure the change in class rule in any event. But however small or large the part of the dialectic in Marx's work, it is clear that such a metaphysical concept has no part whatever to play in an empirical discipline like economics. For an argument that there is an "element of mysticism in the dialectic," see Bober, p. 44. For a different view see Joseph Schumpctcr, Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy, 4th ed. (London: George Allen & Unwin, 1954), p. 10.

theory is inconsistent, But even if Marx really had irrational emotional behavior in mind, his theory still suffers, for it is hard to believe that irrational behavior could provide the motive power for all social change throughout human history. Therefore Marx's theory of social classes is, as Joseph Schumpeter described it, only a "crippled sister" of his more comprehensive Economic Interpretation of History.







