B. THE MARXIAN THEORY OF STATE AND CLASS

Although the British classical economists can be accused of failing to develop an explicit theory of the state, no such charge can be leveled at Karl Marx. For Marx developed an interesting and provocative economic theory of the state at a time when most other economists had not even begun to consider the question. In Marx's theory the state is the instrument through which the ruling class dominates the other, oppressed classes. In the capitalistic period of history the state is the "executive committee of the bourgeoisie"; it protects the property of the capitalist classes and adopts whatever policies are in the interest of the bourgeoisie. The Communist Manifesto says that "political power, properly so called, is merely the organized power of one class for oppressing another." 14
11. Baumol, p. 11.

12. Ibid., pp. 140-156, for long quotations from Mill's Principles and Sidgwick's Principles, on this problem, and for a discussion of the casual comments found on this matter in Frederic Bastiat, J. R. McCulloch, and Friedrich List. See Classics for relevant comments !iy Enrico Barone and Giovanni Montemartini.

13. A. C. Pigou, A Study in Public Finance, 3rd rev. ed. (London: Macmillan, 1949). However, see his p. 33 for an explicit mention of this matter.
14. Karl Marx and Friederich Engels, The Communist Manifesto (New York:


This theory of the state springs naturally from Marx's theory of social classes. Marx believed that "the history of all hitherto existing society is a history of class struggles." u:; Classes were "organized human interest groups." 16 Social classes were also uniformly selfish: they put the class interest above the national interest and had no concern whatever for the interests of the classes that opposed them. For Marx, a social class was not any particular group of people sharing a certain social status or included in a particular income bracket. Classes were defined in terms of property relationships. It was the owners of productive capital, i.e., the "expropriators" of surplus value, who made up the exploiting class, and the exploited propertyless wage earners that made up the proletariat.17
This point of definition is important. If Marx had defined classes
in terms of the social position or prestige of their members, he would not have been justified in speaking of their common interests, for people with different sources of income (i.e., income from labor or income from capital) might nonetheless have similar amounts of prestige. Instead Marx defined a class in terms of the ownership of productive property. Thus all of those in the capitalist class have common interests, and all of those in the proletariat have common interests, as these are groups whose members gain or lose together as prices and wages change. The one group expropriates the surplus value that the other produces; eventually the exploited class understands that it is in its interest, and within its capability, to revolt, thus ending this type of exploitation. In short, the classes are defined in terms of their economic interests, which they will use all methods, including violence, to further.

Just as the class is selfish, so too is the individual. Marx had nothing but contempt for the utopian socialists and others who assumed a benevolent human nature. Much of the self-interest Marx saw around him he attributed to the capitalistic system and bourgeois

League for Industrial Democracy, 1933), p. 82; see also Ralf Dahrendorf, Class and
Class Conflict in Industrial Society (Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 1959),
p. 13.
15. Marx and Engels, Communist Manifesto, p. 59.
16. Dahrendorf, p. 35.

17. Dahrendorf, pp. 30-31; see also Mandell M. Bober, Karl Marx's Interpretation of History, rev. ed. (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1948), esp. pp. 95-96. In this respect Marx was not far different from James Madison, who wrote in the Federalist papers (Number Ten) that "the most common and durable source of factions has been the various and unequal distribution of property. Those who hold and those who are without property have ever formed distinct interests in society."

ideology. "The bourgeoisie ... has left remaining no other nexus between man and man than naked self-interest, than callous 'cash payment.' It has drowned the most heavenly ecstasies of religious fervor, of chivalrous enthusiasm, of philistine sentimentalism, in the icy water of egotistical calculation."18 But if self-interest was most blatant in bourgeois society, it was typical of all of the history of civilized man. "Bare-faced covetousness was the moving spirit of civilization from its first dawn to the present day; wealth, and again wealth, and for the third time wealth; wealth, not of society, but of the puny individual was its only and final aim."19 Marx attacked as hypocritical almost everything for which people said they were willing to make sacrifices; ideologies were cloaks to hide vested interests; the bourgeois spent great sums on the "evangelization of the lower orders," knowing that this would render the workers "submissive to the habits of the masters it had pleased God to put above them."20 He wrote that "the English Established Church, for example, will more readily pardon an attack on 38 of its 39 articles than on 1/39th of its income."21 Only in communism, the primitive communism of the tribe or post-revolutionary communism, would the selfish propensities not control human behavior.
Marx's emphasis on self-interest, and his assumption that classes
will be conscious of their interests, has naturally led most critics to think of Marx as a utilitarian and a rationalist. Some think that this is his main failing and that he emphasizes self-interest and rationality far too much. One example of this view deserves quotation at length. The late C. Wright Mills argued that before class action can come about, there must be:
I) a rational awareness and identification with one's own class interests;
2) an awareness of and a rejection of other class interests as illegitimate; and 3) an awareness of and a readiness to use collective political means to the collective political end of realizing one's interests ... Underlying the general Marxian model there is always ... the political psychology
18. Marx and Engels, Communist Manifesto, p. 62.

19. Friedrich Engels, quoted in Bober, Karl Marx's Interpretation, p. 72. Bober writes: "If the older English economists assumed the economic man in pecuniary dealings, if Machiavelli constructed the political man in the domain of politics, Marx went farther" ( pp. 74-75).

20. Friedrich Engels, Socialism. Utopian and Scientific, trans. Edward Avcling (New York: 1892), pp. xxv, xxxi, xxxvi.
21. Karl Marx, Capital, Everyman ed. (London: J. M. Dent, 1951), II, 864-865.
Sec also Bober, chaps. vi and vii, pp. 115-156.

of "becoming conscious of inherent possibilities." This idea is iust as rationalist as liberalism in its psychological assumptions. For the struggle that occurs proceeds on the rational recognition by competing classes of incompatible material interests; reflection links material fact and interested consciousness by a calculus of advantage. As Veblen correctly pointed out, the idea is utilitarian, and more closely related to Bentham than Hegel.

Both Marxism and liberalism make the same rationalist assumptions that men, given the opportunity, will naturally come to political consciousness of interests, of self or of class [ italics mine].
The error of the Marxian view that people will be utilitarian and rationalistic enough to see the wisdom of engaging in class action is proven, in Mills' view, by the widespread political apathy. "Indifference," says Mills, "is the major sign of the ... collapse of socialist hopes."
But the most decisive comment that can be made about the state of U.S. politics concerns the fact of widespread public indifference ... [Most of the people] are strangers to politics. They are not radical, not liberal, not conservative, not reactionary; they are inactionary; they are out of it.22

Briefly, Marx sees self-interested individuals and self-interested classes acting to achieve their interests. Many critics attack Marx for emphasizing self-interest and individual rationality too much. They feel that most people must not know or care what their class interests are, since class conflict is not the overwhelming force Marx thought it would be.



