B. LABOR-UNION GROWTH IN THEORY AND PRACTICE

That labor unions are concerned about the "free rider" is well known. But this fact has not been given its due in the principal theories of the labor movement, and has been completely ignored in Selig Perlman's well-known theory of the labor movement,27 one of the most impressive and outstanding theories of American labor unions. Perlman attempted to explain the growth of American labor unions, and their emphasis on collective bargaining rather than political reform, mainly through what he called "job consciousness." This "job consciousness" is essentially a belief among workers that there is a scarcity of job opportunities, and this belief Perlman thought was due to a pervasive pessimism among manual workers.28


26. Richard A. Lester, As Unions Mature (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1958), p. 145.
27. Selig Perlman, Theory of the Labor Movement (New York: Macmillan, 1928).
28. Ibid., passim, but esp, p. 6.

Perlman inferred this pessimism among manual workers from the rules and procedures they had developed in their unions. He noted that successful unions strive above all for "job control"-for devices to ensure that their own members will be the first hired and the last fired. The closed shop is viewed not so much as a device for strengthening the union as a technique designed to "conserve" scarce jobs for the workers in a given union.29 Restrictions on the employer's freedom of dismissal are sought by the union, not so much for the protection of the organization as for apportioning the presumably scarce jobs among all of the members according to a "communism of opportunity," 30 In sum, the unions' efforts to prevent the employers from hiring nonunion men, or from discriminating against unionists in promotion, lay-offs, work assignments, shop discipline, and so on, are according to Perlman designed to facilitate the sharing of scarce jobs among all of those in a certain manual group. By contrast, in the present study the presumption, because of the concept of latent groups, is that such union policies are vital to any large union's strength and existence, and reflect organizational imperatives rather than any endemic pessimism among man11 1l workers. The view that the unions' desire for control over employers' hiring and firing policies is due to their need for membership, and does not depend upon any pessimistic "job consciousness," is supported
by some historical evidence.

American unionism made its first major and lasting advance on a national scale between 1897 and 1904. In that period the number of unionized workers increased from 447,000 to 2,072,000, after which union membership fell off only slightly.31 This was a time of considerable prosperity; employment was high, and workers presumably should have had less "pessimism" than usual about employment

29. Ibid., pp. 237-545 and esp. p. 269.

30. "The scarcity consciousness of the manual worker is the product of two main causes ... The typical manualist is aware of his lack of capacity for availing himself of economic opportunities [and] knows himself neither the born taker of risks nor the possessor of a sufficiently agile mind ever to fed at home in the midst of the uncertain game of competitive business. Added to this is the conviction that for him the world has been rendered one of scarcity by an institutional order of things, which purposely reserved the best opportunities for landlords, capitalists and other privileged groups." (Ibid., pp. 239-240.)

31. Irving Bernstein, "The Growth of American Unions," American Economic Review, XLIV (Tune 1954), 303; Leo Wolman, Ebb and Flow in Trade Unionis:m (New York: National Bureau of Economic Research, 1936), p. 15-20.

opportunities. The notable gains in union membership in this period were, moreover, closely correlated with the advance of compulsory membership. The influx of new members started with a number of victories in strikes for the union shop in 1897 and 1898. The number of strikes for "union recognition" increased; there were reported to be 140 in 1897 and 748 in 1904. The number of workers on strike for union recognition reportedly increased by almost ten times over the seven-year period.82 This period marked the climax of an increasing agitation for the closed shop that had begun to gather speed in the 1860's. For the first time unions began to demand that customs and understandings about the closed shop be put in writing.33 This provoked a bitter reaction among employers. Across the nation employers began the first major open-shop campaign. The National Association of Manufacturers, which had not before concerned itself with labor problems, attacked the closed shop in 1903, and its president spearheaded a national open-shop campaign. Moreover the Theodore Roosevelt administration helped fan the flames of public opposition to compulsory unionism.34 The increased employer resistance took its toll. Whereas in 1901, 1902, and 1903 the unions had won in one half to two thirds of the establishments in which they called recognition strikes, in 1904 they won in only 37 per ce.pt. The number of lockouts because of controversies over union recognition and union rules also increased with the open-shop campaign, and a great number of these lockouts were successful.311 Not surprisingly, union membership decreased in 1904 and 1905, but only very slightly. Membership remained rather stable until shortly before World War I.88

32. U.S., Twenty First Annual Report of the Commisisoner of Labor, 1906 (Washington: Government Printing Office, 1907), table X, pp. 580-613. The figures on strikes and lockouts taken from this government report may well be inaccurate or misleading; so not too much reliance should be placed upon them.
33. Stockton, pp. 37-57, esp. p. 43.

34. Ibid., pp. 44-57; Selig Perlman and Philip Taft, Lab01' Movements (New York: Macmillan, 1935), chap. viii, "The Employers' Mass Offensive," pp. 129-138; David B. Truman, The Governmental Process (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1958),
pp. 80-82.
35. U.S., Twenty First Annual Report of the Commissioner of Labor, table X, pp.
580--613, and table XIX, pp. 763-771. See caution in note 32 above.

36. Bernstein, "Growth of American Unions," p. 303; Leo Wolman, The Growth of American Trade Unions, 1880-1923 (New York: National Bureau of Economic Research, 1924), pp. 29--67.


Labor made its most notable gains between 1935 and 1945.87 These gains were not due to any unusual pessimism about the availability of jobs. It was at first a period of growing employment, and later a wartime period of labor shortage, or overfull employment. This period of growth begins with the passage of the Wagner Act in July 1935, or perhaps with the acceptance by employers of the bill's constitutionality when the Supreme Court approved it in April 1937. The Wagner Act made collective bargaining a goal of public policy, and stipulated that whenever the majority of the employees in a bargaining unit voted for a particular union in a representation election, the employer must bargain collectively with that union about all of the employees in that bargaining unit. In order to obtain recognition from an employer after the passage of the Wagner Act, a union had only to persuade a majority of the employees to vote for it; before the passage of this act the union would generally have had to command such support that it could support a strike that would force the employer to submit. The union's task was also made easier by the Wagner Act's prohibition of company unions, and its rules forbidding discrimination against union men. Finally, the Wagner Act specifically allowed the closed shop.38

This act, and the wartime period of overfull employment that was soon to follow, apparently helped to bring about what was undoubtedly the most phenomenal increase in membership in the
history of modern American unionism. In 1937 alone labor-union membership increased by 55 per cent.39 There were apparently
many strikes for union security.4 For the first time the big mass-

37. Bernstein, "Growth of American Unions," p. 303; Milton Derber, "Growth and Expansion," in Labor and the New Deal, ed. Milton Dcrber and Edwin Young (Madison, Wis.: University of Wisconsin Press, 1957), pp. 1-45.

38, R. W. Fleming, "The Significance of the Wagner Act," ubor and the New Deal, ed. Derbcr and Young, pp. 121-157; Joseph G. Rayback, A History of Ami:rican ubor (New York: Macmillan, 1959), pp. 341-346; Arthur M. Schlesinger, Jr., The Coming of the New Deal (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1959), pp. 397-421.
39. Bernstein, "Growth of American Unions," p. 303.

40. Sec U.S., Bureau of Labor Statistics, Strikes in the United States, 1880-1936, Bull. no. 651 (Washington: Government Printing Office, 1938), tables 28-30, pp. 58-77, and H,mdbook oj ubor Statistics, 1947 ed., table E-5, p. 138; and also Irving Bernstein, The New Deal Collective Bargaining Policy (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1950), pp. 143-145.

At least the number of strikes involving what the Bureau of Labor Statistics lumps tocgther as "union organization" or "union recognition" increased pm passu with

production industries were unionized. The vigor of the newly formed CIO added to the momentum of the drive, but the AFL also expanded greatly, soon achieving a larger membership than it had had before the secession of the CIO unions.41 The biggest years, next to 1937, were the years of the greatest wartime labor shortage, 1942, 1943, and 1944.42

Yet there were relatively few strikes in the war years.43 Probably one important reason for the wartime growth of union membership
-in addition to the reason of overfull employment-was the "maintenance of membership" provision forced upon employers by the government whenever there were disputes over the union demands for union security. As other writers have pointed out, the "maintenance of membership" rule added an important element of compulsion,44 for it required that anyone who joined the union (whether

the growth of membership. However, many of the strikes for union recognition did not have to do with compulsory membership, at least directly. In any event the percentage of strikes having to do with union recognition increased from 19 per cent of the total number in 1933 to 47 per cent in 1935 and 57.8 per cent in 1937. And the total number of workers involved in strikes for union recognition increased from 73,000 in 1932 to 288,000 in 1935 and 1,160,000 in 1937.
For the years from 1927 to 1936 the Bureau of Labor Statistics separates out the
strikes having to do with the "closed shop." From these separate statistics it appears that the number of strikes for the closed shop alone is much less than the total number of strikes for "union recognition" (though no doubt many of the "union recognition" strikes that were not openly for the closed shop involved devices designed to encourage employees to join the union). But even the number of regular closed-shop disputes is correlated with the gains in union membership.

Admittedly the connection between the number of strikes having to do with unionsecurity matters and the increase in union membership docs not prove that these strikes were the cause of the gains in membership. Some might contend the reverse: that the number of strikes over union security increased because the union membership increased. Nonetheless, the obvious fact that a successful strike for a union shop would increase union membership, and the other evidence marshaled in this work, make it seem quite likely that union-security strikes boosted union membership.

41. Rayback, Histo1'y of American Labo,-, pp. 351-355; sec also Walter Galenson, The C/0 Challenge to the AFL (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1960), passim; Harry A. Millis and Emily Clark Brown, From the Wagner Act to Taft-Hartley (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1950), pc. 30-271.
42. Bernstein, "Growth of American Unions," p. 303.
43. Rayb2ck, pp. 373-374, 379; Millis and Brown, Wagner Act to Taft-Hartley,
pp. 274, 29.8-300.

44. Bradley in Public Stake in Union Power (note 10, above), p. 159; Millis and Brown, Wagner Act to Taft-Hartley, pp. 296-298.

For a view different from that taken in this study see Joseph Rosenfarb, Freedom and the Administrative State (New York: Harper, 1948), p. 144. Rosenfarb there

voluntarily or because of a "dues inspection line," or other forms of intimidation of social pressure, or because of some temporary personal grievance that required union help) had to remain a member of the union at least until the next contract was signed. This also left unions free to concentrate all of their resources on obtaining new members. The "maintenance of membership" arrangement was enforced by the government in order to keep industrial conflict from obstructing the war effort. The War Labor Board had been given power to compel compliance in disputes affecting the defense effort, and it ruled that, when no other form of union security was in effect and the union desired compulsory membership, the "maintenance of membership" arrangement should be imposed. This type of unionsecurity agreement spread quickly during the war.411
In World War I the situation had been less clear-cut. But again
it appears that there was overfull employment, and thus no special pessimism about a lack of employment opportunities of the kind described by Perlman. And again the crucial position and bargaining power of the unions enabled them to make important advances. Membership increased considerably, though not quite as much as in World War 11.46 In World War I also there was a "War Labor Board." It made awards affecting about 700,000 workers and promoted shop representation committees in previously unorganized industries in the hope that these committees would evolve into fullfledged unions. The relatively favorable attitude of the government was illustrated by the fact that the railway unions won recognition for the nonoperating crafts when the railroads were nationalized during the war, and promptly lost this recognition when the Esch-

says: "Those who hug to their breasts the comforting delusion that the growth of unions is due to 'coercion" should have been forewarned by the experience of the National War Labor Board with the 'escape period' during which union security became operative. Only an insignificant fraction of 1 per cent availed themselves of this opportunity." This argument is reminiscent of the claims that certain totalitarian governments are kept in power by the people, because they have received over 99 per cent of the votes cast in an election.

Union leaders have also used these and similar statistics to argue that workers are so enthusiastic about unions that all but an infinitesimal minority of the workers would join unions even if there were no closed shop. But the force of this argument is weakened by their contentions, at other times, that unions will not endure if the union shop is forbidden. (Bradley in Public Stake in Union Power, p. 166.)
45. U.S., Bureau of Labor Statistics, Handbook <>/ Lab<W Statistics, 1947 Editi<>n,
Bulletin no. 916 (Washington: Government Printing Office), table E-2, p. 133.
46. Bernstein, "Growth of American Unions," p. 303.

Cummins Act returned the railroads to private hands after the war. The shipbuilding industry, moreover, was organized with assistance of the Navy Department.47 The Reverend Jerome Toner sums it up this way: "Unionism had been protected, if not fostered, by the National War Labor Board during the first world war. The American Federation of Labor, although agreeing not to organize nonunion shops during the war, succeeded in enlarging its membership and extending closed shop conditions during and after the war. From 1915 to 1920, there was an increase of 2,503,100 members, and closed shop conditions expanded." 48

In short, the periods when the unions obtained job control, and restricted jobs to union members, were not periods when workers had the most reason to be pessimistic about shortages of employment opportunities. Nor do the figures on union membership growth suggest that unions necessarily had the most appeal to members during periods of pessimism about job availability. The growth of closed-shop and union-shop provisions, and the growth of union membership, were both most striking in periods of growing employment, and even during periods of wartime labor shortage. It appears that whenever tight labor (and product) markets, or favorable legislation, increased labor's bargaining power, unions demanded and obtained union recognition and generally also some form of compulsory membership. Union membership has then accordingly also increased. This tends to suggest that unions have sought "job control," not so much to protect a stagnant or dwindling supply of job opportunities, as to strengthen, expand, and stabilize unions as organizations.

The foregoing argument, based on historical time patterns, can of course be only suggestive, not definitive. A more compelling argument against Selig Perlman's thesis emerges as soon as the demand function for labor is considered. When unions raise wages the quantity of labor demanded tends to fall. It follows that a union that attempts to raise wages cannot be dominated by any pessimistic

47. Ibid., p. 315; Rayback, pp. 773-777; Perlman and Taft, History of Labor (note 34, above), pp. 403-411. Perlman and Taft say, "There was a tangible gain in membership due in large part to the removal by the government of the barriers to unionism created by industry during the previous decade and a half ... The growth was phenomenal in industries directly active in War Production" (p. 410).
48. Toner, pp. 79-80.

consciousness of job scarcity or any passion to conserve employment opportunities.49 Attempts to raise wages, moreover, are inconsistent with the "communism of opportunity" Perlman attributed to labor, It is of course possible that on occasion the demand for labor can be extremely inelastic, in which case an increase in wages would tend to bring only a very minor reduction in employment. But then the workers could hardly be pessimistic, for they could enjoy great gains without any significant sacrifice.

Moreover, as Lloyd Ulman has pointed out, unions have used their closed-shop policies and other instruments of job control mainly to bring in new members.110 But if these new workers were kept out of the union, the jobs of the old members would presumably be more secure. This use of union power is accordingly inconsistent with the idea that unions obtain and employ their instruments of compulsion mainly to preserve job opportunities.

Perlman's theory is, however, given some plausibility by the fact that lasting growth in labor-union membership and strength came only when "business unionism" with its emphasis on "job control" was adopted as the philosophy of the American labor movement. Before the formation of the American Federation of Labor in 1886 under Samuel Gompers, there was no stable, lasting labor organization on a national scale;H so there is every reason to emphasize the respects in which it differed from most of its predecessors. And the most notable difference between the American Federation of Labor under Gompers and most of the preceding general labor organiza. tions was that the Federation emphasized collective bargaining whereas most of its forerunners had emphasized politics and utopian reform.112The reason for the success of the American Federation of Labor, according to Perlman, was that it abjured political activity and concentrated on "job control." This brought it success because

49. I have borrowed the argument in this paragraph from Ulman, Rise of National Trade Union (note 2, above), pp. 580-581. See also John T. Dunlop, Wage Determination under Trade Unions (New York: Augustus M. Kelley, Inc., 1950), pp. 28- 44, esp. p. 40. For a different view see Ozanne's previously cited article (note 2, above).
50. Ulman, p. 580.

51. Ware (note 2, above), passim; Rayback, passim; Phillip S. Foner, History of the Labor Movement in the United States (2 vols., New York: International Publishers, 1947-1955).
52. Perlman, Theory of Labor Movement, pp. 182-200.

84	The Logic of Collectit1e Action
by this time the frontier land had been exhausted and the temporary optimism it had occasioned turned into pessimism about supposedly scarce job opportunities.53

John R. Commons, the author of another well-known, important, md stimulating theory about the American labor movement, also thought the emergence of Gompers' collective-bargaining unionism very important. He ascribed the failure of the previous general labor organizations in large part to their emphasis on politics. The timing of the switch to collective bargaining or "business unionism," in Commons' system as in Perlman's, had to do with the passing of the frontier. With the loss of the frontier "safety valve," the pre9Sure for improvement of wages, as opposed to concern about free land, currency, and the like, increased. More important, the "widening of the market," the emergence of nationwide competition, somehow drove workers to organize for higher wages.u

The success of business unionism, with its attendant union shop or "job control," in contrast with the failure of nineteenth-century political or utopian unionism, can also be explained in terms of the concept of latent groups offered in this study. When a union is engaged in collective bargaining with a particular employer, it can often force the employer to make membership in the union a condition of employment for all of his employees; union members merely need to refuse to work with nonunionists. Once a union achieves adequate recognition from the employer its future can be secure. But the union designed only to work through the political system has no such resource. It cannot make membership in it compulsory; it is not even dealing with the employer, the one who could most easily force workers to join the union. If it did somehow obtain a captive membership it would be in trouble, for as a purely political organization it would have no excuse for compulsory membership; compulsion solely for political purposes would seem altogether anomalous in a democratic political system.
The view that the control over jobs that unions demand arises
53. Ibid., pp. 8, 200-207.

54. Commons and Associates, History of Lahour in the United Statu (New York: Macmillan, 1953), 1, 1-234, esp. 9. For a summary of these theories of American unionism, as well as some original comments about this problem, see John T. Dunlop, "The Development of Labor Orgar,ization: A Theoretical Framework," in Insights into LIZbor Issues, ed. Richard A. Lester and Joseph Shister (New York: Macmillan, 1948), pp. 163-193.

primarily from their desire for strength and survival, rather than from any pessimistic job consciousness, is supported by the low level of participation in most labor unions. Sometimes unions fine absent members to obtian attendance at meetings.55 Students of unions express some surprise at the usual lack of participation:

If the potential benefits are high, one might expect that most groups would exhibit high participation. Yet over-all activities in the locals studied was low. Frequently less than five percent of the total membership attended meetings, and it was difficult to draft men to accept minor union positions or committee memberships. Most union leaders admitted frankly that apathy was one of their major prob1ems.()6
Those opposed to unions could argue that this proves that the union shop forces men who do not agree with the policies of the union to remain in the organization, and is evidence that the workers do not really favor unions, much less compulsory membership. But this argument stumbles over the fact that impartially conducted elections have shown again and again that unionized workers support unionshop provisions. The Taft-Hartley law's sponsors apparently thought that workers would often throw off union-shop provisions in free elections; so they required unions, in order to qualify for a union shop, to petition the National Labor Relations Board for a secretballot election and then obtain a majority of those eligible to votenot just a majority of those voting. These hopes were frustrated. In the first four months under the act the unions won all but four out of the 664 union-shop elections held, with more than 90 per cent of the employees voting for compulsory union membership. In the first four years, 44,795 union shops were authorized in such elections; 97 per cent of the elections were won by the unions. Accordingly in 1951 the act was amended so that the elections are no longer required.57
5,. Lester, At Unio-nt Mature, pauim, but esp. pp. 17 and 31; Hjalmer Rosen and
R. A. Hudson Rosen, The Union Member Speaks (New York: Prentice-Hall, 1955),
pp. 80-85; Rose (note 21, above), pp. 88-90; Arnold L. Tannenbaum and Robert
L. Kahn, Participation in Union Locals (Evanston, 111.: Row, Peterson, 1958), passim; Clark Kerr, Unions and Union Leaders of Their Own Choosing (New York: Fund for the Republic, 1957), p. 15.

56. Sayles and Strauss, Local Union, p. 190. See also David Riesman, Nathan Glazer, and Reucl Denney, The Lonely Crowd (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1956), p. 203.
57. Phelps, Union Security, pp. 40-41.


Thus there is a paradoxical contrast between the extremely low participation in labor unions and the overwhelming support that workers give to measures that will force them to support a union. Over 90 per cent will not attend meetings or participate in union affairs; yet over 90 per cent will vote to force themselves to belong to the union and make considerable dues payments to it. An interesting study by Hjalmer Rosen and R. A. Hudson Rosen illustrates this paradox well.118 The Rosens conducted an opinion survey of District 9 of the International Association of Machinists and found many workers who told them that, since fines for absences from union meetings had been discontinued, attendance had dropped, as one member put it, "something awful." There was more dissatisfaction among the members over the poor attendance than on any other point covered in the extensive survey; only 29 per cent were satisfied with the attendance at meetings. The Rosens inferred from this that the members were probably inconsistent. "If the rank and file feel that members should attend meetings and are dissatisfied when they don't, why don't they correct the situation by all going to the meetings? The condition they are dissatisfied with is certainly in their power to change." 511
In fact the workers were not inconsistent: their actions and attitudes were a model of rationality when they wished that everyone would attend meetings and failed to attend themselves. For if a strong union is in the members' interest, they will presumably be better off if the attendance is high, but (when the fines for failure to attend meetings are not in effect) an individual worker has no economic incentive to attend a meeting. He will get the benefits of the union's achievements whether he attends meetings or not and will probably not by himself be able to add noticeably to those achievements.60
58. Rosen and Rosen, Union Member Speaks,
59. Ibid., pp. 82-83.

60. Max Weber, when he theorizes about "closed" and "open" groups, seems to assume that when a group restricts participation in certain activities to its own members, it usually docs so in order to keep from sharing monopolies or other special privileges with others, or for the sake of being exclusive. But an organized group might insist that only its own members be allowed to participate in a certain activity or privilege, not with the idea of restricting advantages to those already in the group, but for the purpose of incr1Casing the membership and power of the group organization. Weber may have realized this, of course, but he does not mention this motive for the "dosed shop" in his discussion of "Closed and Open Relat,onships," even


This sort of situation, in which workers do not participate actively in their union, yet wish that members in general would, and support compulsory membership by overwhelming majorities, is of course analogous to the characteristic attitude of citizens toward their government. Voters are often willing to vote for higher taxes to finance additional government services, but as individuals they usually strive to contribute as little as the tax laws allow (and on occasion even less). Similarly, farmers often increase their output, even when the demand is inelastic and this is contrary to their common interests, and then vote for government controls that force them to reduce output.

The conclusion of this analysis is that the union shop cannot be explained by any pessimism among workers about any lack of job opportunities, and that the union shop, or other forms of compulsion, are highly important to the strength and stability of labor unions. It is the union as an organization, not the worker directly, that needs the "job control" that Perlman thought was the essence of American unionism. Small, local unions may exist without compulsion in industries where the workplaces are very small. Occasionally, too, some large unions may be able to survive if they can manage very attractive insurance schemes, or offer other adequate noncollective benefits. It is even possible that for brief periods unions could survive even for reasons completely different from those described in this study; that is, because of emotions so strong that they would lead individuals to behave irrationally, in the sense that they would contribute to a union even though a single individual's contribution would have no perceptible effect on a union's fortunes, and even though they would get the benefits of the union's achievements whether they supported it or not. But it does not seem to be the case that large, national labor unions with the strength and durability of those that now exist in this country could exist without some type of compulsory membership. No doubt ideological motives could provoke occasional outbursts of organization, but it is unlikely that many large unions could last longer or accomplish more than the Locofocos or the Knights of Labor, without at least some measure of coercion.

though he there mentions the closed shop. See his Theory of Social and Economic Organization, trans. Talcott Parsons and A. M. Henderson (New York: Oxford University Press, 1947), pp. 139-143.




