B. INSTITUTIONAL ECONOMICS AND THE PRESSURE GROUP—JOHN R. COMMONS

Probably the most thoughtful advocacy of occupational as opposed to geographic representation in America came from the institutional economist John R. Commons.12 And in his case the concern for occupational-industrial representation was directly tied up with his strong support for the pressure group. At one point Commons advocated direct election of representatives for each interest group, which representatives would be the effective legislature of the country.13

9. Pius XI, Quadragesimo Anno.
10. Elbow, passim, esp. pp. 81-96, 100-118, 197-204.

11. Coker, Recent Political Thought, pp. 229-290, 460-496; Elbow, passim; Richard Humphrey, Georges Sord (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1951), passim, esp. pp. 193-194. In some respects Adolph Berle's ideas on the political role that corporations might play is also similar to pluralism; see The Twentieth Century Capitalist Revolution (New York: Harcourt, Brace, 1954), and Power without Property (New York: Harcourt, Brace, 1959).

12. John R. Commons, Representative Democracy (New York: Bureau of Economic Research, n.d.); Institutional Economics (Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1959), II, 877-903; The Economics of Collective Action (New York: Macmillan, 1950).

13. Sec chap. ii, entitled "Representation of Interests," in Commons' Representative Democracy. "To get back to first principles of representative government (historically as well as logically), each of these diverse interests should be permitted to assemble by itself and elect its spokesman. The ncgrocs would then elect Booker T. Washington;
the bankers would elect Lyman J. Gage and J. Pierpont Morgan; , .. the Trade
Unions would elect Samuel Gompers and P. M. Arthur; the clergy would elect Archbishop Corrigan and Dr. Parkhurst; the Universities would elect Seth Low and President Eliot ..But scarcely one of these men could today be elected by popular suffrage in the limited wards or districts where they happen to sleep ... But at the same time this original principle is unconsciously forcing its way forward. There is no social movement of the past twenty years more quiet nor more potent than the organization of private interests" (pp. 23-24). Sec also Harvey Fergusson, People and Power (New York: William Morrow, 1947), esp. pp. 110-111. One shortcoming of such a pressure-group parliament is that no one legislator can feasibly trade off one interest in favor of another, and therefore the degree of compromise necessary to a continuing democracy may be unattainable.

(G. D. H. Cole and other Guild Socialists advocated a somewhat similar political system in England.) 14 But most of the time Commons argued only that pressure groups were the most representative and beneficial forces affecting American economic policy.

The basis for Commons' thinking was the view that the market mechanisms did not of themselves bring about fair results to the different groups in the economy, and the conviction that this unfairness was due to disparities in the bargaining power of these different groups. These disparities would not be removed by collective action promoted by the government unless pressure groups forced through the necessary reforms, since machine politicians and men of wealth controlled the legislatures. Thus pressure groups were to Commons virtually an indispensable means for the achievement of a just and rational economic order.16 The conflicts among different interest groups were the vehicles of reform and progress. The economist, Commons believed, should not look for economic legislation that would be in the interest of the whole of society; he should rather attach himself to some pressure group or class and counsel it on the measures that were in its long-run interest. It was after all through their identification with the rising commercial and industrial classes of nineteenth-century England that the classical economists came to have a decisive influence on British economic policy.16
But the most important part of Commons' thought for the present


14. "It is nonsense to talk of one man representing another, or a number of others; ... there is no such thing as representation of one person by another, because in his very nature a man is such a being that he cannot be represented ... We say that the only way in which there can be real representation is when the representative represents not another person but some group of purposes which men have in common; that you never ought to try to represent Smith and Jones and Brown by means of Robinson, but that, if Smith, Jones, and Brown have a common interest in some particular thing whether as producers or as football players or in any other capacity, it is quite legitimate for them to choose Robinson to execute for them and on their h half their common purpose. That is to say, all true representation, if we are right,
,s not representation of persons, but only representation of common purposes; or, to put it in other words, any real representation is necessarily functional representation." This is from G. D. H. Cole, "Guild Socialism," as excerpted in Introduction to Contemporary Civilization in the West, published and prepared by Columbia University, II, 889. See aho Cole's S,:/f-Government in Industry (London: G. Bell & Sons, 1917).

15. Commons, Economict of Collecti,,e Action, passim, esp. pp. 33, 59, 262-291; Institutional Economics, passim; and The Legal Foundations of Capitalism (Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1957), passim.

J 6. "'Economists and Class Partnership," in Labor and Administration (New York: Macmillan, 1913), a collection of articles by Commons, pp. 51-71 and esp. pp. 54 and 67.

purpose was his belief that the economic pressure groups were more representative of the people than the legislatures based on territorial representation. In his last book, in which he summed up his thought with the help of Kenneth Parsons, he wrote: "A notable fact about the pressure groups is the recent concentration of their headquarters in Washington, D.C., the political capital of the country. The economic pressure groups really become an occupational parliament of the American people, more truly representative than the Congress elected by territorial divisions [italics mine]. They are the informal counterpart of Mussolini's 'corporate state,' the Italian occupational state." 17 Commons' encouragement of the economic pressure group went so far as to suggest that the pressure groups, and especially the labor unions, farm organizations, and cooperatives, were the most vital institutions in society and the lifeblood of democracy. The freedom to form pressure groups mattered more than any of the other democratic freedoms. The traditional legislature, he felt, was worth preserving against the assaults of Communism and Fascism mainly because it in turn would allow the freedom to associate in interest groups or pressure groups to be maintained.

But far more important than other reasons for improving the legislatures is the protection they may give to voluntary associations ... The rights of man are now his rights of free association ... the civil liberties that make possible the voluntary associations of labor unions, farmers' unions, business cooperatives, and political parties. It is these associations rather than the older individualism of free individual action, that are the refuge of modern Liberalism and Democracy from Communism, Fascism, or Banker Capitalism [italics mine].18

This aspect of Commons' thought has more recently been developed by Kenneth Parsons, Commons' most thoughtful disciple and interpreter.19 And some aspects of John Kenneth Galbraith's theory of countervailing power, which may come through political action by pressure groups, have a slight similarity to Commons' theories.20
17. Commons, Economic; of Collective Action, p. 33; sec also pp. 59, 262-277, and
291. Yet sometimes Commons argued, inconsistently it would seem, that some important groups were not at all well organized. This was especially true of the farmers. Ibid., p. 213, and Institutional Economics, II, 901-902.
18. Commons, Institutional Economics, II, 901-903.

19. Kenneth Parsons, "Social Conflicts and Agricultural Programs," /ournal of Farm Economics, XXIII (November 1941), 743-764.
20. John Kenneth Galbraith, American Capitalism: The Concept of Counurvailing




