C. THE CLOSED SHOP AND ECONOMIC FREEDOM IN THE LATENT GROUP

If the conclusion that compulsory membership is usually essential for an enduring, stable labor movement is correct, then it follows that some of the usual arguments against the union shop are fallacious. One of the most common arguments against compulsory unionism, one used even by some professional economists, 61 depends on an analogy with ordinary private business. In essence the argument is that, since a firm must please its customers if it is to retain their patronage, a union should also be forced to stand the test of an open shop, in which case it would still succeed if its performance pleased the potential members. This "right-to-work" argument often comes from those who are most ardent in support of a free-enterprise system based on the "profit motive." But if the same profit motive that is assumed to activate consumers and businessmen also stimulates workers, the enforcement of "right-to-work" laws would bring about the death of trade unions.62 A rational worker will not voluntarily contribute to a (large) union providing a collective benefit since he alone would not perceptibly strengthen the union, and since he would get the benefits of any union achievements whether or not he supported the union.

Arguments about compulsory union membership in terms of "rights" are therefore misleading and unhelpful. There are of course many intelligent arguments against unions and the union shop. But none of them can rest alone on the premise that the union shop and other forms of compulsory unionism restrict individual freedom, unless the argument is extended to cover all coercion used to support the provision of collective services. There is no less infringement of "rights" through taxation for the support of a police force or a
61. For example, Bradley in Public Stake in Union Power, esp. pp. 151-152.

62. Edward H. Chamberlin, in arguing the case for legislation to restrict the power of labor unions, does not make any explicit references to the collective nature of the service that unions provide, and thus he lessens the clarity of his argument. He refers to the union's privilege lo ignore the "right to work," along with other legal immunities enjoyed by labor unions but not by private business. Then he says: "Certainly the appeal of equal treatment for all is a strong one in a democracy. Why should it not apply in this area?" Later, still referring apparently to the legal advantages that trade unions enjoy and companies do not, he says: "I have seen a statement by an important labor leader ... to the effect that even to raise the question of whether unions have too much power is to question their very right to exist ... Yet what could be more absurd I Has anyone ever held that to reduce and regulate monopoly power in the business area was to question the right of business to exist?" Chamberlin, "Can Union Power Be Curbed?" Atlantic Monthly (June 1959), p. 49.

judicial system than there is in a union shop. Of course, law and order are requisites of all organized economic activity; the police force and the judicial system are therefore presumably more vital to a country than labor unions. But this only puts the argument on the proper grounds: do the results of the unions' activities justify the power that society has given them? The debate on the "rightto-work" laws should center, not around the "rights" involved, but on whether or not a country would be better off if its unions were stronger or weaker.

To be consistent, those who base their case against the union shop solely on "right-to-work" grounds must also advocate the "unanimous consent" approach to taxation put forth by Knut Wicksell in the 1890's.63 Wicksell was often an advocate of laissez faire policies (though by no means in any basic sense a conservative),64 who argued that "coercion is always an evil in itself" and that therefore the state should never exact taxes from a citizen without his consent. He recognized, however, that the state could not support the essential public services through a market system, since the citizen could get the benefits from these services whether he purchased any or not. Accordingly the only just method of financing the state services was to require that virtually every appropriation of government funds obtain a unanimous vote. If a proposed expenditure could not, under any distribution of the tax burden, command unanimous support in parliament it should be rejected. Otherwise some citizens would be forced to pay taxes for a government service that they did not want at all or did not want enough to help pay for it. Thus in the sphere of government, as in the free market economy, no one would be forced to spend money for things he did not want.65 (More recently, James Buchanan and Gordon Tullock have in a

63. Knut Wicksdl, "A New Principle of Just Taxation," Classics in the Theory of Public Finance, ed. Richard A. Musgrave and Alan T. Peacock (London: Macmillan, 1958), pp. 72-119.

64. Wicksell went to jail for a lecture that lampooned the chastity of the Virgin Mary, refused to take an oath of allegiance to the Swedish King, refused to legalize his marriage, and devoted much of his life to the advocacy of birth control at a time when that was quite unpopular. He wanted government policies more favorable to the working class, and was considered an ally by many socialists. See Torsten Gardlund, The Life of Knut Wickse/1, trans. Nancy Adler (Stockholm: Almquist & Wiksell, I958).

65. Obviously this approach is not consistent with the use of taxes for the redistribution of income, and it also neglects the likelihood that people would hide their true preferences for services in the bargaining over the distribution of the tax burden.

similar spirit suggested that something approaching a unanimous vote be required before some types of expenditure should be allowed.) 66

Wicksell's old-fashioned liberalism is reminiscent of John Maynard Keynes' attitude toward conscription during World War I. Keynes opposed conscription, but he was not a pacifist. He opposed conscription because it deprived the citizen of the right to decide for himself whether or not to join in the fight. Keynes was exempt as a civil servant from conscription; so there is no need to question his sincerity.67 Apparently his belief in the rights of the individual against a majority of his compatriots was very strong indeed.

Most of the present generation would think Wicksell's unanimousconsent theory of taxation and Keynes' total opposition to conscription carried the laissez-faire philosophy to an altogether impractical, and perhaps even fantastic, extreme. But Wicksell's and Keynes' views are nothing more than consistent applications of the liberal premise embodied in the arguments of those who oppose the union shop on the ground that it denies the "right to work." For if, under all circumstances, the individual has a "right to work" (the right to work without paying union dues), surely he must have the "right not to fight" (the right to avoid military service), and the "right to spend" (the right to avoid paying taxes for government services he does not want). Collective bargaining, war, and the basic governmental services are alike in that the "benefits" of all three go to everyone in the relevant group, whether or not he has supported the union, served in the military, or paid the taxes. Compulsion is involved in all three, and has to be. Accordingly the consistent critic of the closed shop will either go all the way down the liberal road with Wicksell and Keynes, or else argue simply that unions are so harmful, or ineffective, or unimportant,68 that the country should

66. James Buchanan and Gordon Tullock, The Calculus of Corisent (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1962), pp. 263-306.

67. Sir Roy Harrod doubts that Keynes went so far as to apply or exemption from conscription as a conscientious objector, emphasizing that Keynes was in any event exempt from military service as an important civil servant. But there can be little doubt that Keynes at least at some time held the view described above, for there is among his records a handwritten note stating this view fully and precisely. See Harrod's "Clive Bell on Keynes," Economic fournal, LXVII (December 1957), 692- 699, and Elizabeth Johnson's correction of Harrod, with Harrod's concession and comment, in the Economic Journal, LXX (March 1960), 160-167.
68. An intelligent attack on the closed shop might well center around the argument

not be concerned about their viability nor tolerant of their privileges.69

It may seem strange to draw an analogy between the union and the state. Some have supposed, with Hegel, that the state must be different in all of the more important respects from every other type of organization.70 But normally both the union and the state provide mostly common or collective benefits to large groups. Accordingly, the individual union member, like the individual taxpayer, will not be able to see by himself that the collective good is provided, but will, whether he has tried to have this good provided or not, nonetheless get it if it is provided by others. The union member, like the individual taxpayer, has no incentive to sacrifice any more than he is forced to sacrifice.



