B. LABOR LOBBIES

The labor union is probably the most important single tpye of pressure-group organization and accordingly deserves first place in any discussion of large lobbying organizations. Though the opponents of the labor unions are exaggerating when they claim that the Democratic candidates in industrial states are merely puppets of labor leaders, it is quite clear that the Democrats in these states are normally very friendly to labor, and that the Republicans usually treat the labor unions as the major source of enemy strength. The membership of the AFL-CIO is several times larger than the membership of any other lobbying organization. The labor unions have, moreover, an impressive organizational network to match their numbers: there are about 60,000 to 70,000 union locals in this country.5 Labor leaders have claimed that they could influence about 25 million voters.6 Their purely political expenditures are measured in the millions.7 In 1958 some candidates may have been elected as a result of the large labor vote brought out by "right-to-work" proposals on the ballot in some industrial states. In Michigan the Demo-


5. V. 0. Key, Politics, Parties, and Pressure Groups, 4th ed. (New York: Crowell, 1958), p. 62.

6. Dayton David McKean, Party and Pressure Politics (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1949), p. 464.
7. For example, ibid., pp. 475-4i6.

cratic party came out of the doldrums as labor organization grew.8 There were about 200 unionists who were either delegates or alternate delegates to the 1952 Democratic national convention.9 The late Sumner Slichter argued that "the American economy is a laboristic economy, or at least is rapidly becoming one." By this he meant "that employees are the most influential group in the community and that the economy is run in their interest more than in the interest of any other economic group." 10 Professor Slichter may have been mistaken, but if so only because many business, professional, and agricultural organizations unite in intense opposition to what they regard as the excessive claims of labor.

Just as there can be little doubt that labor unions are a significant political force, neither can there be much question that this political force is a by-product of the purely industrial activities that unions regard as their major function. As Chapter III pointed out, it was only when labor unions began to concentrate on collective bargaining with employers and abandoned the mainly political orientation of the earlier American unions, that they came to have any stability or power. It was only when the labor unions started to deal with the employers, who alone had the power to force the workers to join the union, that they began to prosper. It is, moreover, hard to see how the labor unions could have obtained and maintained the "union shop" in a democratic country like the United States if they had been solely political organizations. Labor unions came to play an important part in the political struggle only long after they had forsaken political action as a major goal. It is worth noting that the Wagner Act, which made organizing a union with compulsory membership much easier, and which led to the greatest increase in union membership, was passed before labor unions came to play a really important role in politics. The experience of Great Britain also shows that a democratic nation is often happy to overlook compulsory membership in organizations that engage in collective bargaining, but hesitant to make membership in a political organization in any degree automatic. Although, as Chapter III explained, it has long been taken for granted in Britain that unionists will often not work with nonunion men, there has been a great deal of bitter con-
8. Key, p. 73.	9. !bid.

10. Sumner H. Stichter, The American Economy (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1950), p. 7.

troversy over whether union men should "contract in" or "contract out" of a contribution to the Labour party. (The vast majority of the members of that party, incidentally, are a by-product of the trade unions' activities; all except a small minority belong through the trade unions.) 11 If, then, it is true that a democratic nation would not normally want to make membership in a purely political union compulsory, and that compulsion is essential to a stable labor movement of any size, then it follows that the political power of unions is a by-product of their nonpolitical activities.



