A. THE PURPOSE OF ORGANIZATION

Since most (though by no means all) of the action taken by or on behalf of groups of individuals is taken through organizations, it will be helpful to consider organizations in a general or theoretical way.1 The logical place to begin any systematic study of organizations is with their purpose. But there are all types and shapes and sizes of organizations, even of economic organizations, and there is then some question whether there is any single purpose that would be characteristic of organizations generally. One purpose that is nonetheless characteristic of most organizations, and surely of practically all organizations with an important economic aspect, is the furtherance of the interests of their members. That would seem obvious, at least from the economist's perspective. To be sure, some organizations may out of ignorance fail to further their members' interests, and others may be enticed into serving only the ends of the leadership.2

1. Economists have for the most part neglected to develop theories of organizations, but there are a few works from an economic point of view on the subject. See, for example, three papers by Jacob Marschak, "Elements for a Theory of Teams," Management Science, I (January 1955), 127-137, "Towards an Economic Theory of Organization and Information," in Decision Processes, ed. R. M. Thrall, C. H. Combs, and R. L. Davis (New York: John Wiley, 1954), pp. 187-220, and "Efficient and Viable Organization Forms," in Modern Organization Theory, ed. Mason Haire (New York: John Wiley, 1959), pp. 307-320; two papers by R. Radner, "Application of Linear Programming to Team Decision Problems," Management Science, V (January 1959), 143-150, and "Team Decision Problems," Annals of Mathematical Statistics,
XXXIII (September 1962), 857-881; C. B. McGuire, "Some Team Models of a Sales Organization," Management Science, VII (January 1961), 101-130; Oskar Morgenstern, Prolegomena to a Theory of Organization (Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Research Memorandum 734, 1951); James G. March and Herbert A. Simon, Organizations (New York: John Wiley, 1958); Kenneth Boulding, The Organizational Revolution (New York: Harper, 1953).

2. Max Weber called attention to the case where an organization continues to exist for some time after it has become meaningless because some official is making a living out of it. See his Theory of Social and Economic Organization, trans. Talcott Parsons and A. M. Henderson (New York: Oxford University Press, 1947), p. 318.

But organizations often perish if they do nothing to further the interests of their members, and this factor must severely limit the number of organizations that fail to serve their members.

The idea that organizations or associations exist to further the interests of their members is hardly novel, nor peculiar to economics; it goes back at least to Aristotle, who wrote, "Men journey together with a view to particular advantage, and by way of providing some particular thing needed for the purposes of life, and similarly the political association seems to have come together originally, and to continue in existence, for the sake of the general advantages it brings." 8 More recently Professor Leon Festinger, a social psychologist, pointed out that "the attraction of group membership is not so much in sheer belonging, but rather in attaining something by means of this membership." The late Harold Laski, a political scientist, took it for granted that "associations exist to fulfill purposes which a group of men have in common." 11

The kinds of organizations that are the focus of this study are expected to further the interests of their members.6 Labor unions are expected to strive for higher wages and better working conditions for their members; farm organizations are expected to strive for favorable. legislation for their members; cartels are expected to strive for higher prices for participating firms; the corporation is expected to further the interests of its stockholders; 7 and the state is expected
3. Ethic-s viii.9.1160a.

4. Leon Fcstinger, "Group Attraction and Membership," in Group Dynamics, ed. Dorwin Cartwright and Alvin Zander (Evanston, Ill.: Row, Peterson, 1953), p. 93.
5. A. Grammar of Politics, 4th ed. (London: George Allen&. Unwin, 1939), p. 67.

6. Philanthropic and religious organizations are not necessarily expected to serve only the interests of their members; such organizations have other purposes that arc considered more important, however much their members "need" to belong, or arc improved or helped by belonging. But the complexity of such organizations need not be debated at length here, because this study will focus on organizations with a significant economic aspect. The emphasis here will have something in common with what Max Weber called the "associative group"; he called a group associative if "the orientation of social action with it rests on a rationally motivated agreement," Weber contrasted his "associative group" with the "communal group" which was centered on personal affection, erotic relationships, etc., like the family. (See Weber, pp. 136- 139, and Grace Coyle, Soda/ Process in Organized Groups, New York: Richard Smith, Inc., 1930, pp. 7-9.) The logic of the theory developed here can be extended to cover communal, religious, and philanthropic organizations, but the theory is not particularly useful in studying such groups. See my pp. 6lnl7, 159-162.

7. That is, its members. This study does not follow the terminological usage of those organization theorists who describe employees as "members" of the organization for which they work. Here it is more convenient to follow the language of everyday

to further the common interests of its citizens (though in this nationalistic age the state often has interests and ambitions apart from those of its citizens).

Notice that the interests that all of these diverse types of organizations are expected to further are for the most part common interests: the union members' common interest in higher wages, the farmers' common interest in favorable legislation, the cartel members' common interest in higher prices, the stockholders' common interest in higher dividends and stock prices, the citizens' common interest in good government. It is not an accident that the diverse types of organizations listed are all supposed to work primarily for the common interests of their members. Purely personal or individual interests can be advanced, and usually advanced most efficiently, by individual, unorganized action. There is obviously no purpose in having an organization when individual, unorganized action can serve the interests of the individual as well as or better than an organization; there would, for example, be no point in forming an organization simply to play solitaire. But when a number of individuals have a common or collective interest-when they share a single purpose or objective-individual, unorganized action (as we shall soon see) will either not be able to advance that common interest at all, or will not be able to advance that interest adequately. Organizations can therefore perform a function when there are common or group interests, and though organizations often also serve purely personal, individual interests, their characteristic and primary function is to advance the common interests of groups of individuals.
The assumption that organizations typically exist to further the
common interests of groups of people is implicit in most of the literature about organizations, and two of the writers already cited make this assumption explicit: Harold Laski emphasized that organizations exist to achieve purposes or interests which "a group of men have in common," and Aristotle apparently had a similar notion in mind when he argued that political associations are created and maintained because of the "general advantages" they bring. R. M.

usage instead, and to distinguish the members of, say, a union from the employees of that union. Similarly, the members of the union will be considered employees of the corporation for which they work, whereas the members of the corporation arc the common stockholders.

Maclver also made this point explicitly when he said that "every organization presupposes an interest which its members all share." 8 Even when unorganized groups arc discussed, at least in treatments of "pressure groups" and "group theory," the word "group" is used in such a way that it means "a number of individuals with a common interest." It would of course be reasonable to label even a number of people selected at random (and thus without any common interest or unifying characteristic) as a "group"; but most discussions of group behavior seem to deal mainly with groups that do have common interests. As Arthur Bentley, the founder of the "group theory" of modern political science, put it, "there is no group without its interest." 9 The social psychologist Raymond Cattell was equally explicit, and stated that "every group has its interest." 10 This is also
the way the word "group" will be used here.

Just as those who belong to an organization or a group can be presumed to have a common interest,11 so they obviously also have purely individual interests, different from those of the others in the organization or group. All of the members of a labor union, for example, have a common interest in higher wages, but at the same time each worker has a unique interest in his personal income, which depends not only on the rate of wages but also on the length of time that he works.

8. R. M. Maciver, "Interests," Encyclopaedia of the Social Scienus, VII (New York: Macmillan, 1932), 147.
9. Arthur Bentley, The Proceu of Go11t!t"nmmt (Evanston, Ill.: Principia Press,
1949), p. 21I. David B. Truman takes a similar approach; see his The Go11t!rnmental Prouu (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1958), pp. 33-35. See also Sidney Verba, Small Groups and Political Beha11i0f' (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1961), pp. 12-13.

10. Raymond Cattell, "Concepts and Methods in the Measurement of Group Syntality," in Small Groups, ed. A. Paul Hare, Edgard F. Borgatta, and Robert F. Bales (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1955), p. 115.

11. Any organization or group will of course usually be divided into subgroups or factions that are opposed to one another. This fact does not weaken the assumption made here that organizations exist to serve the common interests of members, for the assumption docs not imply that intragroup conflict is neglected. The opposing groups within an organization ordinarily have some interest in common (if not, why would they maintain the organization?), and the members of any subgroup or faction also have a separate common interest of their own. They will indeed often have a common purpose in defeating some other subgroup or faction. The approach used here does not neglect the conflict within groups and organizations, then, because it considers each organization as a unit only to the extent that it does in fact attempt to serve a common interest, and considers the various subgroups as the relevant units with common interests to analyze the factional strife.





