A. THE COHERENCE AND EFFECTIVENESS OF SMALL GROUPS

The greater effectiveness of relatively small groups-the "privileged" and "intermediate" groups-is evident from observation and experience as well as from theory. Consider, for example, meetings that involve too many people, and accordingly cannot make decisions promptly or carefully. Everyone would like to have the meeting end quickly, but few if any will be willing to let their pet concern be dropped to make this possible. And though all of those participating presumably have an interest in reaching sound decisions, this all too often fails to happen. When the number of participants is large, the typical participant will know that his own efforts will probably not make much difference to the outcome, and that he will be affected by the meeting's decision in much the same way no matter how much or how little effort he puts into studying the issues. Accordingly, the typical participant may not take the trouble to study the issues as carefully as he would have if he had been able to make the decision by himself. The decisions of the meeting are thus public goods to the participants (and perhaps others), and the contribution that each participant will make toward achieving or improving these public goods will become smaller as the meeting becomes larger. It is for these reasons, among others, that organizations so often turn to the small group; committees, subcommittees, and small leadership groups are created, and once created they tend to play a crucial role.

This observation is corroborated by some interesting research results. John James, among others, has done empirical work on this subject, with results that support the theory offered in this study, though his work was not done to prove any such theory. Professor James found that in a variety of institutions, public and private, national and local, "action taking" groups and subgroups tended to be much smaller than "non-action taking" groups and subgroups. In

one sample he studied, the average size of the "action taking" subgroups was 6.5 members, whereas the average size of the "non-action taking" subgroups was 14 members. These subgroups were in a large banking concern, whose secretary spontaneously offered the following opinion: "We have found," he wrote, "that committees should be small when you expect action and relatively large when you are looking for points of view, reactions, etc," 1 This is apparently not a situation restricted to banking. It is widely known that in the United States Congress and in the state legislatures, power resides to a remarkable, and what is to many an alarmmg degree, in the committees and subcommittees.2 James found that U.S. Senate subcommittees at the time of his investigation had 5.4 members on the average, House subcommittees had 7.8, the Oregon state government, 4.7, and the Eugene, Oregon, municipal government, 5.3.3 In short, the groups that actually do the work are quite small. A different study corroborates James's findings; Professor A. Paul Hare, in controlled experiments with groups of five and twelve boys, found that the performance of the groups of five was generally superior.t The sociologist Georg Simmel explicitly stated that smaller groups could act more decisively and use their resources more effectively than large groups: "Small, centripetally organized groups usually call on and use all their energies, while in large groups, forces remain much oftener potential." 6
The fact that the partnership can be a workable institutional form
when the number of partners is quite small, but is generally unsuccessful when the number of partners is very large, may provide


I. John James, "A Preliminary Study of rhe Size Determinant in Small Group Interaction," American Sociological Review, XVI (August 1951), 474-477.
2. Bertram M. Gross, The Legislatir1e Struggle (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1953),
pp. 265-337; see also Ernest S. Griffith, Congress (New York: New York University Press, 195l ).

3. For a light-hearted and humorous, but nonetheless helpful, argument that the ideal committee or cabinet has only five members, sec C. Northcote Parkinson, Parkinson's Law (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1957), pp. 33-34.
4. A. Paul Hare, "A Study of Interaction and Consensus in Different Sized Groups,"
American Sociological Review, XVII (June I 952), 261-268.

5. Georg Simmel, The Sociology of George Simmel, trans. Kurt H. Wnlff (Glencoe, Ill.: Free Press ( 1950]), p. 92, In another place Simmel says that socialist societies, by which he appears to mean voluntary groups that share their incomes according to some principle of equity, must necessarily be small. "Up to this day, at least, socialistic or nearly socialistic societies have been possible only in very small groups and have always failed in larger ones" (p. 88).

Group Size and Group Behavior	55
another illustration of the advantages of smaller groups. When a partnership has many members, the individual partner observes that his own effort or contribution will not greatly affect the performance of the enterprise, and expects that he will get his prearranged share of the earnings whether or not he contributes as much as he could have done. The earnings of a partnership, in which each partner gets a prearranged percentage of the return, are a collective good to the partners, and when the number of partners increases, the incentive for each partner to work for the welfare of the enterprise lessens. This is to be sure only one of a number of reasons why partnerships tend to persist only when the number of partners is fairly small, but it is one that could be decisive in a really large partnership.6

The autonomy of management in the large modern corporation, with thousands of stockholders, and the subordination of management in the corporation owned by a small number of stockholders, may also illustrate the special difficulties of the large group. The fact that management tends to control the large corporation and is able, on occasion, to further its own interest at the expense of the stockholders, is surprising, since the common stockholders have the legal power to discharge the management at their pleasure, and since they have, as a group, also an incentive to do so, if the management is running the corporation partly or wholly in the interest of the managers. Why, then, do not the stockholders exercise their power? They do not because, in a large corporation, with thousands of stockholders, any effort the typical stockholder makes to oust the management will probably be unsuccessful; and even if the stockholder should be successful, most of the returns in the form of higher dividends and stock prices will go to the rest of the stockholders, since the typical stockholder owns only a trifling percentage of the outstanding stock. The income of the corporation is a collective good to the stockholders, and the stockholder who holds only a minute percentage of the total stock, like any member of a latent group, has no incentive to work in the group interest. Specifically, he has no incentive to challenge the management of the company, however inept or corrupt it might be. (This argument does not, however, entirely apply to the stockholder who wants the manager's position

6. The foregoing argument need not apply to partners that are supposed to be "sleeping partners," i.e., provide only capital. Nor docs it take account of the fact that in many cases each partner is liable for the losses of the whole partnership.

and pelf for himself, for he is not working for a collective good; it is significant that most attempts to overthrow corporate management are started by those who want to take over the management themselves.) Corporations with a small number of stockholders, by contrast, are not only de jure, but also de facto, controlled by the stockholders, for in such cases the concepts of privileged or intermediate groups apply .1

There is also historical evidence for the theory presented here. George C. Homans, in one of the best-known books in American social science,8 has pointed out that the small group has shown much more durability throughout history than the large group:

At the level of ... the small group, at the level, that is, of a social unit (no matter by what name we call it) each of whose members can have some firsthand knowledge of each of the others, human society, for many millennia longer than written history, has been able to cohere ... They have tended to produce a surplus of the goods that make organization successful.

. . . ancient Egypt and Mesopotamia were civilizations. So were classical India and China; so was Greco-Roman civilization, and so is our own Western civilization that grew out of medieval Christendom ...

The appalling fact is that, after flourishing for a span of time, every civilization but one has collapsed ... formal organizations that articulated the whole have fallen to pieces ... much of the technology has even been forgotten for lack of the large scale cooperation that could put it in effect ... the civilization has slowly sunk to a Dark Age, a situation, much like the one from which it started on its upward path, in which the mutual hostility of small groups is the condition of the internal cohesion of each one . . . Society can fall thus far, but apparently no farther ... One can read the dismal story, eloquently told, in the historians of civilization from Spengler to Toynbee. The one civilization that has not entirely gone to pieces is our Western Civilization, and we are desperately anxious about it.

[But] At the level of the tribe or group, society has always found itself able to cohere.9

7. Sec Adolph A. Berle, Jr., and Gardiner C. Means, The Modern Corporation and PritJate Property (New York: Macmillan, 1932); J. A. Livingston, The American Stockholder, rev. ed. (New York: Collier Books, 1963); P. Sargent Florence, Ownership, Control and Success of Large Companies (London: Sweet & Maxwell, 1961); William Mennell, Takeover (London: Lawrence & Wishart, 1962).
8. George C. Homans, The Human Group (New York: Harcourt, Brace, 1950).

9. Ibid., pp. 454-456. See also Neil W. Chamberlain, General Theory of Economic Process (New York: Harper, 1955), esp. pp. 347-348, and Sherman Krupp, Pattern in Organization Analysis (Philadelphia: Chilton, 1961), pp. 118-139 and 171-176.


Homans' claim that the smallest groups are the most durable is quite persuasive and certainly supports the theory offered here. But his deduction from these historical facts is not wholly consistent with the approach in this study. His book focuses on the following idea: "Let us put our case for the last time: At the level of the small group, society has always been able to cohere. We infer, therefore, that if civilization is to stand, it must retain ... some of the features of the small group itself." 10 Homans' conclusion depends on the assumption that the techniques or methods of the small group are more effective. But this is not necessarily true; the small, or "privileged," group is in a more advantageous position from the beginning, for some or all of its members will have an incentive to see that it does not fail. This is not true of the large group; the large group does not automatically find that the incentives that face the group also face the individuals in the group. Therefore, it does not follow that, because the small group has historically been more effective, the very large group can prevent failure by copying its methods. The "privileged" group, and for that matter the "intermediate" group, are simply in a more advantageous position.11



