H. THE “FORGOTTEN GROUPS”—THOSE WHO SUFFER IN SILENCE

Now that the major economic pressure groups have been studied, and the relationship of the theories developed here to noneconomic groups and political parties has been sketched, only one major type of group remains to be considered. Unhappily, this is the type of group about which least is known, and about which very little can be said. The remaining type of group is the unorganized group-the group that has no lobby and takes no action. Groups of this kind fit the main argument of this book best of all. They illustrate its central point: that large or latent groups have no tendency voluntarily to act to further their common interests. This point was asserted in the Introduction, and it is with this point that the study must conclude. For the unorganized groups, the groups that have no lobbies and exert no pressure, are among the largest groups in the nation, and they have some of the most vital common interests.

Migrant farm laborers are a significant group with urgent common interests, and they have no lobby to voice their needs. The whitecollar workers are a large group with common interests, but they have no organization to care for their interests. The taxpayers are a vast group with an obvious common interest, but in an important

out of the theory, and only voting was considered, the theory could be correct. I am indebted to Edward C. Banfield for calling this point to my attention, and for suggesting the Johnson quotation in the text. That quotation is from James Boswell, The Life of Samuel /ohnson (London; Navarre Society Limited, I 924), II, 393-394. I 03. The importance of big-city machines (and sometimes also rural courthouse cliques) suggests another source of such organizational substance as the state and national parties have. The state and national parties draw some organizational strength

sense they have yet to obtain representation. The consumers are at least as numerous as any other group in the society, but they have no organization to countervail the power of organized or monopolistic producers.104 There are multitudes with an interest in peace, but they have no lobby to match those of the "special interests" that may on occasion have an interest in war. There are vast numbers who have a common interest in preventing inflation and depression, but they have no organizations to express that interest.

Nor can such groups be expected to organize or act simply because the gains from group action would exceed th.! costs. Why would the people of this (or any other) country organize politically to prevent inflation when they could serve their common interest in price stability just as well if they all spent less as individuals? Virtually no one would be so absurd as to expect that the individuals in an economic system would voluntarily curtail their spending to halt an inflation, however much they would, as a group, gain from doing this. Yet it is typically taken for granted that the same individuals in a political or social context will organize and act to further their collective interests. The rational individual in the economic system does not curtail his spending to prevent inflation (or increase it to prevent depression) because he knows, first, that his own efforts would not have a noticeable effect, and second, that he would get the benefits of any price stability that others achieved in any case.105 For the same two reasons, the rational individual in the large group in a socio-political context will not be willing to make any sacrifices to achieve the objectives he shares with others. There is accordingly no presumption that large groups will organize to act in their com-

from the fact that they are partly federations of fairly small numbers of city machines and courthouse cliques. Harold Laski charged (with some exaggeration) that "political parties in the United States arc not organizations to promote ideas but loose federations of machines for getting enough votes to enable the parties to lay their hands on the spoils." From "The American Political Scene: II. The Bankruptcy of Parties," The Nation, CLXIII (November 23, 1946), 583.

104. E. E. Schattschneider, Politics, Pressu,-es, and the Tariff (New York: PrenticeHall, 1935).

105. The point that the individuals in any economy have the power to prevent <leprcssion or inflation simply by spending more or less, but have as individuals no incentive to do so, came to my attention through William J. Baumol, Welfare Economics and
the Theory of the State (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1952), pp. 95-
99. See also Abba P. Lerner, "On Generalizing the General Theory," American Economic Review, L (March 1960), 121-144, esp. 133.

mon interest. Only when groups are small, or when they are fortunate enough to have an independent source of selective incentives, will they organize or act to achieve their objectives.

The existence of large unorganized groups with common interests is therefore quite consistent with the basic argument of this study. But the large unorganized groups not only provide evidence for the basic argument of this study: they also suffer if it is true.




