B. PROBLEMS OF THE TRADITIONAL THEORIES

Homans' belief that the lessons of the small group should be applied to large groups has much in common with the assumption upon which much small-group research is based. There has been a vast amount of research into the small group in recent years, much of it based on the idea that the results of ( experimentally convenient) research on small groups can be made directly applicable to larger groups merely by multiplying these results by a scale factor.12 Some
social psychologists, sociologists, and political scientists assume that the small group is so much like the large group, in matters other than size, that it must behave according to somewhat similar laws. But if the distinctions drawn here among the "privileged" group, the "inter-
10. Homans, p. 468.

11. The diffuence between latent groups and privileged or intermediate groups is only one of several factors accounting for the instability of many ancient empires and civilizations. I have pointed to another such factor myself in a forthcoming book.

12. Kurt Lewin, Field Theory in Social Change (New York: Harper, 1951), pp. 163-164; Harold H. Kelley and John W. Thibaut, The Social Psychology of Groups (New York: John Wiley, 1959), pp. 6, 191-192; Hare, "Study of Interaction and Consensus," pp. 261-268; Sidney Verba, Small Groups and Political Behavior (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1961), pp. 4, 14, 99-109, 245-248.

mediate" group, and the "latent" group have any meaning, this assumption is unwarranted, at least so long as the groups have a common, collective interest. For the small, privileged group can expect that its collective needs will probably be met one way or another, and the fairly small (or intermediate) group has a fair chance that voluntary action will solve its collective problems, but the large, latent group cannot act in accordance with its common interests so long as the members of the group are free to further their individual interests.

The distinctions developed in this study also suggest that the traditional explanation of voluntary associations explained in Chapter I needs amendment. The traditional theory emphasizes the (alleged) universality of participation in voluntary associations in modern societies and explains small groups and large organizations in terms of the same causes. In its most sophisticated form, the traditional theory argues that the prevalence of participation in the modern voluntary association is due to the "structural differentiation" of developing societies; that is, to the fact that as the small, primary groups of primitive society have declined or become more specialized, the functions that multitudes of these small groups used to perform are being taken over by large voluntary associations. But, if the meaningless notion of a universal "joiner instinct" is to be rejected, how is the membership in these new, large voluntary associations recruited? There are admittedly functions for large associations to perform, as small, primary groups become more specialized and decline. And the performance of these functions no doubt would bring benefits to large numbers of people. But will these benefits provide an incentive for any of the individuals affected to join, much less create, a large voluntary association to perform the function in question? The answer is that, however beneficial the functions large voluntary associations are expected to perform, there is no incentive for any individual in a latent group to join such an association.13 However important a function may be, there is no presumption that a latent group will be able to organize and act to perform this function. Small primary groups by contrast presumably can act to perform functions that are beneficial to them. The traditional theory

13. There is no suggestion here, of cours , that all groups are necessarily explained in terms of monetary or material interests. The argument does not require that individuals have only monetary or material wants. See note 17 below.

of voluntary associations is therefore mistaken to the extent that it implicitly assumes that latent groups will act to perform functional purposes the same way small groups will. The existence of such large organizations as do exist must moreover be explained by different factors from those that explain the existence of smaller groups. This suggests that the traditional theory is incomplete, and needs to be modified in the light of the logical relationships explained in this study. This contention is strengthened by the fact that the traditional theory of voluntary associations is not at all in harmony with the empirical evidence, which indicates that participation in large voluntary organizations is very much less than that theory would suggest.u

There is still another respect in which the analysis developed here can be used to modify the traditional analysis. This involves the question of group consensus. It is often assumed (though usually implicitly) in discussions of organizational or group cohesion that the crucial matter is the degree of consensus; if there are many serious disagreements, there will be no coordinated, voluntary effort, but if there is a high degree of agreement on what is wanted and how to get it there will almost certainly be effective group action.15 The degree of consensus is sometimes discussed as though it were the only important determinant of group action or group cohesion. There is, of course, no question that a lack of consensus is inimical to the prospects for group action and group cohesion. But it does not follow that perfect consensus, both about the desire for the collective good and the most efficient means of getting it, will always bring about the achievement of the group goal. In a large,

14. Mirra Komaravsky, "The Voluntary Associations of Urban Dwellers," American Sociological Review, XI (December 1946), 686---698; Floyd Dotson, "Patterns of Voluntary Membership among Working Class Families," American Sociological Review, XVI (October I 951), 687; John C. Scott, Jr., "Membership and Participation in Voluntary Associations," American Sociological Re11iew, XXII (June 1957), 315; and Murray Hausknecht, The /oiners-A Sociological Description of Voluntary Association Membership in the United States (New York: Bedminster Press, 1962).

15. See Hare, "Study of Interaction and Consensus"; Raymond Cattell, "Concepts and Methods in the Measurement of Group Syntality," in Small Groups, ed. A. Paul Hare, Edward F. Borgatta, and Robert F. Bales (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1955); Leon Festinger, A Theory of Cognitive Dissonance (Evanston, Ill.: Row, Peterson, 1957); Leon Festinger, Stanley Schachter, and Kurt Back, "The Operation of Group Standards," in Group Dynamics, ed. Darwin Cartwright and Alvin Zander (Evanston, Ill.: Row, Peterson, 1953); David B. Truman, The Governmental Process (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1958).

latent group there will be no tendency for the group to organize to achieve its goals through the voluntary, rational action of the members of the group, even if there is perfect consensus. Indeed, the assumption made in this work is that there is perfect consensus. This is, to be sure, an unrealistic assumption, for perfection of consensus, as of other things, is at best very rare. But the results obtained under this assumption are, for that reason, all the stronger, for if voluntary, rational action cannot enable a large, latent group to organize for action to achieve its collective goals, even with perfect consensus, then a fortiori this conclusion should hold in the real world, where consensus is usually incomplete and often altogether absent. It is thus very important to distingiush between the obstacles to group-oriented action that are due to a lack of group consensus and those that are due to a lack of individual incentives.



