F. FARM COOPERATIVES AND FARM LOBBIES

There was, meanwhile, one state in which the Farm Bureau was developing important new organizational techniques, and in which it was making its best progress. These organizational techniques, which have since been widely copied, have unfortunately never been explained or analyzed in any single publication, and as a result the problems of the farm organizations in general, and the Farm Bureau in particular, have often been misunderstood. Throughout the thirties and forties the Farm Bureau in Illinois was coming to have more and more membership in relation to the other major agricultural states. The Illinois Farm Bureau (which strictly speaking should be called the "Illinois Agricultural Association") had a tenth fewer members than the Iowa Farm Bureau (the most nearly comparable organization) in 1925, but it had twice as many members by 1933 and an even bigger lead over the Iowa Farm Bureau by 1938.78

The progress of the Farm Bureau in Ilinois was due to the extensive system of cooperative business organizations it had set up in that state. But these cooperatives were not the "Rochdale" type of cooperatives normally found in this country, but rather a new type, which is appropriately called the "Kirkpatrick" type of "cooperative," because it was designed primarily by Donald Kirkpatrick, the general


Most of what I shall have to say in this section is based upon many hundreds of interviews with leaders and members of the Farm Bureau and the Farmers Union, and on an extended examination of some of the publications and documents of these two organizations and their cooperatives and other business affiliates. To the best of my knowledge, the relationship of the farm organizations and their affiliates has never been explained, at least in detail. I had planned (and still hope) to write at some length on this subject, and for this reason undertook detailed research into some of the relevant primary sources.

75. On this whole question of the relation between governmental units and agencies and lobbying strength see Charles M. Hardin, The Politics of Agriculture (Glencoe, Ill.: Free Press, 1952), passim; and also John D. Black, Federal-State-Local Relations in Agriculture, National Planning Association, Planning Pamphlet No. 70 (February 1950).

76. From an undated mimeographed set of figures entitled "Memberships Paid to American Farm Bureau Federation," which was prepared by the American Farm Bureau Federation.

counsel for the Illinois Agricultural Association.77 The "Kirkpatrick" cooperatives differ from other cooperatives, first of all, in that they are controlled, not by their patrons, but by a legally separate organization. All of the voting stock in the cooperative business and mutual insurance companies associated with the Illinois Agricultural Association is held, not by their patrons, but by the Illinois Agricultural Association itself-the political or lobbying organization.78 The cooperative marketing, supply, and insurance companies associated with the Farm Bureau in Illinois are run, then, by an organization that is legally completely separate, and which has legislative and lobbying objectives rather than the business or economic objectives cooperatives and mutual insurance companies normally have. The system was set up in such a way that the business purposes of the purely economic parts of the system would always be completely subordinate to the political part of the system. As an official pamphlet on the history of the Farm Bureau insurance companies in Illinois points out, "men of vision were drafting policies and systems of control that placed the insurance companies forever under the direction of the parent organization." 79 (Italics mine.)

The proof that the interest of the political arm of the Farm Bureau is important even in the management of the business side of the movement is found in the fact that some of the business enterprises are not allowed to sell their product to anyone who is not, and will not become a member of the political organization. This is true primarily of the mutual casualty insurance companies. The marketing and farm-supply cooperatives controlled by the Farm Bureau in Illinois will normally do business with anyone, but they generally will not pay a "patronage dividend" to anyone who is not a member of the Illinois Agricultural Association. This means many farmers find that, if they do not join the Farm Bureau, they lose patronage

77. Illinois Agricultural Association, Guardians of Tomorrow, undated pamphlet published by IAA insurance service, p. 10.

78. "Business Services Developed," The Illinois Agricultural Association Record (January 1941), pp. 34-42; Wilfred Shaw, "The Farm Bureau as Parent Organization" (an undated typescript written by Shaw as a staff member of the Illinois Agricultural Association).

79. Guardians of Tomorrow, pp. 8-9. For interesting comments on the Illinois Agricultural Association, see Arthur Moore, The Farmer and the Rest of Us (Boston: Little, Brown, 1945), pp. 80-98. This section of my book has benefited from criticisms by W. E. Hamilton, director of research for the American Farm Bureau Federation, who feels, however, that certain aspects of this discussion are mistaken or misleading.

dividends or other noncollective business benefits amounting to for more money than the Farm Bureau dues; thus it would cost them money, sometimes a lot of money, to stay out. So the Farm Bureau dues often come indirectly out of the earnings of Farm Bureau business enterprises. Obviously, arrangements of this kind do not exist primarily for business reasons. The requirement that the benefits from patronizing a Farm Bureau business organization should normally go only to Farm Bureau members in maintained in the interests of the political organization. The publications of the organization admit this. For example: "Still another avenue of vision an<l hope was being explored in the field of commercial services with the thought that offering them through the state association would bring about greater membership participation ... Thus, in looking into the possibilities of establishing commercial services to be ofiered by the state association, it was in the hope that such services would be confined to Farm Bureau members only." 80

The Kirkpatrick type of cooperative, then, is distinguished from other cooperatives, first, in that it is controlled by a lobbying or legislative organization, and second, by the fact that it generally restricts the benefits of trading with it to members of that lobbying or legislative organization. This Kirkpatrick plan has worked very well indeed in Illinois. In recent years the membership of the Illinois Agricultural Association has come to include almost every farmer in the state (as well as a sizable number of nonfarmers who have dealt with its business organizations). It is sometimes said ( though this is no doubt an exaggeration) that it is economically almost impossible to operate a farm in Illinois without patronizing some Farm Bureau business and therefore becoming a member of the Farm Bureau. The Farm Bureau businesses in Illinois deal i11 a vast variety of products.81 By 1951 the Illinois Farm Supply Company, which is only one of the Farm Bureau business organizations, had paid out (along with its local affiliates) over 41.5 million dollars in patronage dividcnds.8t The Country Mutual Casualty Company, another Farm Bureau company in Illinois, had 337,000 insurance policies in force. Since there are

SU. G11ardiant of Tomorrou-, pp. 5-6.

81. Illinois Agricultural Association, "The Farm Bureau !<lea,'" n.tl., mimeo.; Illinoi, Farm Supply Co., Men of 1/111101! Farm S11pply Co., 1'126-1951 ( 1951 ).

82. Men of Illinois Farm Supply Co., 1926-1951. See also Jllinois Farm Supply Co., 32nd Annual Report, Chicago: Nov. J 8, 1958.

not nearly that many farmers in the state,88 some farmers must have more than one policy and many nonfarmers must have dealt with the company. These policies obviously have brought a good proportion of the farmers in the state into the Illinois Agricultural Association. The membership in this organization has grown pari passu with the expansion of its business affiliates.

The success of the Kirkpatrick type of business organization in Illinois bred imitation by state Farm Bureaus throughout the nation.84 By now Farm Bureau business organizations of one kind or another are operating in almost every state. These organizations are generally, but not invariably, patterned in the exact image of those in Illinois. They are normally controlled by the state Farm Bureaus and generally restrict their benefits to Farm Bureau members. They have normally been quite profitable. This profitability often owes something to the favorable tax treatment given cooperatives, but that is not the only explanation. The Farm Bureau has created an especially large number of automobile insurance companies, and these may have profited from the fact that their clientele was largely rural, and thus at times probably less apt to drive in congested areas and be involved in traffic accidents. It is interesting that the two largest automobile insurance companies in the nation, State Farm and Nationwide, both started out selling insurance to farmers in affiliation with the Farm Bureau.85

As the Kirkpatrick type of business organization has been adopted by state Farm Bureaus all over the nation, the membership in the Farm Bureau has increased manyfold. The membership in the American Farm Bureau Federation was 163,000 in 1933, 444,000 in 1940, 828,000 in 1944, and 1,275,000 in 1947, and since 1953 has been in excess of a million and a half.86 The growth in membership has
83. Guardians of Tomorrow, p. 19.

84. On the extent to which Farm Bureau insurance companies cover the nation, see American Agricultural Mutual Insurance Company, "Directory of State Farm Bureau Insurance Companies," March 25, 1959, mimeo., and "Summary of Insurance in Farm Bureau Companies," Oct. 1, 1948.

85. Murray D. Lincoln, Vice President in Charge of Revolution (New York: McGrawHill, 1960); Karl Schriftgiesser, The Farmer from Merna: A Biography of George /. Mecherle and A History of the State Farm Insurance Companies (New York: Random House, 1955).

86. "Memberships Paid" (note 76, above). There is an interesting contrast here between the farm organizations' successes in using business institutions to provide noncollectivc benefits and the inability of most labor unions to proviJe noncollective benefits through business activities that arc sufficient to maintain their membership.

followed the expansion of the business organizations that tend to restrict their benefits to Farm Bureau members. The American Farm Bureau Federation now has what no farm organization in America has ever had before: a large, stable, nationwide membership.

The size and relative stability of the American Farm B<1reau Federation, then, has been the result of two factors. One is that for a long while it was the natural channel through which farmers could get technical aid and education from the government; the other is that it controls a vast variety of business institutions that normally provide special benefits to Farm Bureau members. The Farm Bureau is of course also a lobbying organization-one of the nation's largest. But there is almost no evidence that the lobbying the Farm Bureau has done accounts for much of its membership. The fluctuations in its membership clearly cannot be explained by any changes in its legislative policies, or in the popularity of its policies. On the contrary, the Farm Bureau seems to have grown very rapidly in periods when, if the results of polls and elections can be believed, its policies were the least popular. The theory of latent groups would suggest that the lobbying activities of an organization as large as the Farm Bureau would not provide an incentive that would lead rational individuals to join the organization, even if they were in complete agreement with its policies. Therefore, large pressure-group organizations must derive their strength as a by-product of some nonpolitical functions. The lobbying strength of the Farm Bureau seems, then, to have been a by-product of the county agents, on the one hand, and the Farm Bureau business organizations, on the other.

The Farm Bureau is not, however, the only farm organization whose political power is a by-product of its nonpolitical functions. The Farmers Union, which had such a troubled and unstable existence until the late thirties, has now found a stable, solid membership in the Great Plains, and it has got this stability through the

Presumably the main explanation of the contrast is that farmers--especially the larger ones who are the most likely to belong to farm organizations-have special needs arising out of the farm business that farm cooperatives can satisfy. The farmer needs marketing facilities for his farm production and a vast variety of agricultural supplies, and there is no similar special demand on the part of industrial wage earners. Annther factor that may help to explain the contrast is that farmers have experience in running their farm businesses and thus are able to manage cooperatives more efficiently than industrial workers could. It is perhaps significant that such unions as have hail successful business ventures have tended to represent relatively skilled workers.

farm cooperatives and insurance companies with which it is associated. The Farmers Union has sponsored some mutual insurance companies which are like the Farm Bureau insurance companies in that they normally do business only with those who are or will become members of the political branch of the movement. In addition, it has arrangements with a number of farm cooperatives which further increase its strength. Those farm cooperatives associated with the Farmers Union normally "check off" membership in the Farmers Union-that is to say they simply subtract the dues to the Farmers Union from the patronage dividends the farmer earns by patronizing the cooperative. In addition, these cooperatives normally pay five per cent of their earnings to an "Educational Fund" which is spent by the Farmers Union for lobbying, organizational work, and the like.87

Because of the recreational and social benefits the Grange provides for its members, and because of the limited character of its lobbying activities, the Grange probably has less need for business enterprises than the Farm Bureau or the Farmers Union. Yet it, too, has a considerable variety of business organizations associated with it, and many of these buinesses also provide an incentive for membership in the Grange.88

There is one farm organization that has tried not to use business institutions or governmental agencies to obtain membership. This is a new and small organization-the National Farmers Organization. It has advertised that the "NFO insures your income instead of your car," 89 thereby implicitly critcizing the business activities of the


87. See Mildred K. Stoltz, This is Yor,rs-The Montana Fa,-mers Union and Its Cooperative Associates (Minneapolis: Lund Press, n.d.); Harold V. Knig-ht, Grass Roots-The Story of the North Dakota Farmers Union (Jamestown, N.D.: North Dakota Farmers Union, 1947); Ross B. Talbot, "Agrarian Politics in the Northern Plains," unpub. diss., University of Chicago.

88. National Federation of Grange Mutual Insurance Companies, /011rnal of Proceedings, Twenty-Sixth AnnZ1al Con,,entinn, Sept. 12, 1960; letter of Aug. 2, 1961 from Sherman K. Ives, Secretary of the National Federation of Grange Mutual Insurance Companies, to author. On the importance of cooperatives to Grange membership in the early 1870's, see George Cerny, "Cooperati'Jn in the Midwest in the Granger Era, 1869-75," Agricultural History, XXXVII (October 1963), 187--205. for membership statistics on all major farm organizations, see Robert L. Tontz, "Memhership of General Farmers' Organizations, United States, I 874-1960," Agrirnltural History,
XXXVIII (July 1964), 143-156.

89. NFO Reporter, I (November 1956), 3. See also George Brandsberg, The Twa Sides in NFO's Battle (Ames, Iowa: Iowa State University Press, 1964).

Farm Bureau. But it has had a great deal of trouble getting members, and this policy may be changing. Significantly, the National Farmers Organization has so far failed in its "holding actions," or strikes, to withhold farm products from the market. The failure of these strikes was exactly what the theory of latent groups would have led one to expect. Should the National Farmers Organization some day succeed, without using violence or other selective incentives, in maintaining farm prices by getting farmers to withhold some of their output from the market, that would tend to refute the theory offered here.



