C. SOCIAL INCENTIVES AND RATIONAL BEHAVIOR

Economic incentives are not, to be sure, the only incentives; people are sometimes also motivated by a desire to win prestige, respect, friendship, and other social and psychological objectives. Though the phrase "socio-economic status" often used in discussions of status suggests that there may be a correlation between economic position and social position, there is no doubt that the two are sometimes different. The possibility that, in a case where there was no economic incentive for an individual to contribute to the achievement of a group interest, there might nonetheless be a social incentive for him to make such a contribution, must therefore be considered. And it is obvious that this is a possibility. If a small group of people who had an interest in a collective good happened also to be personal friends, or belonged to the same social club, and some of the group left the burden of providing that collective good on others, they might, even if they gained economically by this course of action, lose socially by it, and the social loss might outweigh the economic gain. Their friends might use "social pressure" to encourage them to do their part toward achieving the group goal, or the social club might exclude them, and such steps might be effective, for everyday observation reveals that most people value the fellowship of their friends and associates, and value social status, personal prestige, and self-esteem. The existence of these social incentives to group-oriented action does not, however, contradict or weaken the analysis of this study. If

anything, it strengthens it, for social status and social acceptance are individual, noncollective goods. Social sanctions and social rewards are "selective incentives"; that is, they are among the kinds of incentives that may be used to mobilize a latent group. It is in the nature of social incentives that they can distinguish among individuals: the recalcitrant individual can be ostracized, and the cooperative individual can be invited into the center of the charmed circle. Some students of organizational theory have rightly emphasized that social incentives must be analyzed in much the same way as monetary incentives.16 Still other types of incentives can be analyzed in much the same way.17

16. See especially Chester I. Barnard, Tiu: Functi<ms of the Executive (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1938), chap xi, "The Economy of Incentives,"
pp. 139-160, and the same author's Organization and Management (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1948), chap. ix, "Functions and Pathology of Status Systems in Formal Organizations," pp. 207-244; Peter B. Clark and James Q. Wilson, "Incentive Systems: A Theory of Organizations," Administrative Science Quartt:rly, VI (September 1961), 129-166; and Herbert A. Simon, Administrative BehaviOI' (New York: Macmillan, 1957), esp. pp. 115-117. I am indebted to Edward



C. Banfield for helpful suggestions on social incentives and organization theory.

17. In addition to monetary and social incentives, there are also erotic incentives, psychological incentives, moral incentives, and so on. To the extent that any of these types of incentives leads a latent group to obtain a collective good, it could again only be because they are or can be used as "selective incentives," i.e., because they distinguish between those individuals who support action in the common interest and those who do not. Even in the case where moral attitudes determine whether or not a person will act in a group-oriented way, the crucial factor is that the moral reaction serves as a "selective incentive." If the sense of guilt, or the destruction of self-esteem, that occurs when a person feels he has forsaken his moral code, affected those who had contributed toward the achievement of a group good, as well as those who had not, the moral code could not help to mobilize a latent group. To repeat: the point is that moral attitudes could mobilize a latent group only to the extent they provided selective incentives. The adherence to a moral code that demands the sacrifices needed to obtain a collective good therefore need not contradict any of the analysis in this study; indeed, this analysis shows the need for such a moral code or for some other selective incentive.

At no point in this study, however, will any such moral force or incentive be used to explain any of the examples of group action that will be studied. There arc three reasons for this. First, it is not possible to get empirical proof of the motivation behind any person's action; it is not possible definitely to say whether a given individual acted for moral reasons or for other reasons in some particular case. A reliance on moral explanations could thus make the theory untestable. Second, no such explanation is needed; since there will be sufficient explanations on other grounds for all the group action that will be considered. Third, most organized pressure groups are explicitly working for gains for themselves, not gains for other groups, and in such cases it is hardly plausible to ascribe group action to any moral code. Moral motives or incentives for group action have therefore been discussed, not to explain any


In general, social pressure and social incentives operate only in groups of smaller size, in the groups so small that the members can have face-to-face contact with one another. Though in an oligopolistic industry with only a handful of firms there may be strong resentment against the "chiseler" who cuts prices to increase his own sales at the expense of the group, in a perfectly competitive industry there is usually no such resentment; indeed, the man who succeeds in increasing his sales and output in a perfectly competitive industry is usually admired and set up as a good example by his competitors. Anyone who has observed a farming community, for instance, knows that the most productive farmer, who sells the most and thus does the most to lower the price, is usually the one with the highest status. There are perhaps two reasons for this difference in the attitudes of large and small groups. First, in the large, latent group, each member, by definition, is so small in relation to the total that his actions will not matter much one way Of" another; so it would seem pointless for one perfect competitor, or a member of some other latent group, to snub or abuse another for a selfish, antigroup action, because the recalcitrant's action would not be decisive in any event. Second, in any large group everyone cannot possibly know everyone else, and the group will ipso facto not be a friendship group; so a person will ordinarily not be affected socially if he fails to make sacrifices on behalf of his group's goals. To return to the case of the farmer, it is clear that one farmer cannot possibly know all the other farmers who sell the same commodity; he would not feel that the social group within which he measured his status had much to do with the group with which he shared the interest in the collective good. Accordingly, there is no presumption thai: social incentives will lead individuals in the latent group to obtain a collective good. There is, however, one case in which social incentives may well be able to bring about group-oriented action in a latent group. This is

given example of group action, but rather to show that their existence need not contradict the theory offered here, and could if anything tend to support it.

The erotic and psychological incentives that must be important in family and friendship groups could logically be analyzed within the framework of the theory. On the other hand, "affective" groups such as family and friendship groups could normally be studied much more usefully with entirely different sorts of theories, since the analysis used in this study does not shed much light on these groups. On the special features of "affective" groups, see Verba (note 12, above), p. 6 and pp. 142- 184.

the case of a "federal" group-a group divided into a number of small groups, each of which has a reason to join with the others to form a federation representing the large group as a whole. If the central or federated organization provides some service to the small constituent organizations, they may be induced to use their social incentives to get the individuals belonging to each small group to contribute toward the achievement of the collective goals of the whole group. Thus, organizations that use selective social incentives to mobilize a latent group interested in a collective good must be federations of smaller groups. The more important point, however, is that social incentives arc important mainly only in the small group, and play a role in the large group only when the large group is a federation of smaller groups.

The groups small enough to be classified here as "privileged" and "intermediate" groups are thus twice blessed in that they have not only economic incentives, but also perhaps social incentives, that lead their members to work toward the achievement of the collective goods. The large, "latent" group, on the other hand, always contains more people than could possibly know each other, and is not likely (except when composed of federated small groups) to develop social pressures that would help it satisfy its interest in a collective good. There is, of course, much evidence for this skepticism about social pressures in a large group in the history of perfectly competitive industries in the United States. Now, if the conclusion that the strength of social pressures varies greatly between small and large groups has validity, it further weakens the traditional theory of voluntary organizations.18

18. There is, however, another kind of social pressure that may occasionally be operative. That is the social pressure that is generated, not primarily through personto-person friendships, but through mass media. If the members of a latent group are somehow continuously bombarded with propaganda about the worthiness of the attempt to satisfy the common interest in question, they may perhaps in time develop social pressures not entirely unlike those that can be generated in a face-to-face group, and these social pressures may help the latent group to obtain the collective good. A group cannot finance such propaganda unless it is already organized, and it may not be able to organize until it has already been subjected to the propaganda; so this form of social pressure is probably not ordinarily sufficient by itself to enable a group to achieve its collective goals. It would, for example, seem unlikely that there would be much prospect of success in a program to persuade farmers through propaganda to further their interests by voluntarily restricting output, unless there were some captive source of funds to finance the effort. So this form of social pressure generated by mass media does not seem likely to be an important independent source


Some critics may protest that even if social pressure does not exist in the large or latent group, it does not follow that the completely selfish or profit-maximizing behavior, which the concept of latent groups apparently assumes, is necessarily significant either; people might even in the absence of social pressure act in a selfless way. But this criticism of the concept of the latent group is not relevant, for that concept does not necessarily assume the selfish, profit-maximizing behavior that economists usually find in the marketplace. The concept of the large or latent group offered here holds true whether behavior is selfish or unselfish, so long as it is strictly speaking "rational." Even if the member of a large group were to neglect his own interests entirely, he still would not rationally contribute toward the provision of any collective or public good, since his own contribution would not be perceptible. A farmer who placed the interests of other farmers above his own would not necessarily restrict his production to raise farm prices, since he would know that his sacrifice would not bring a noticeable benefit to anyone. Such a rational farmer, however unselfish, would not make such a futile and pointless sacrifice, but he would allocate his philanthropy in order to have a perceptible effect on someone. Selfless behavior that has no perceptible effect is sometimes not even considered praiseworthy. A man who tried to hold back a flood with a pail would probably be considered more of a crank than a saint, even by those he was trying to help. It is no doubt possible infinitesimally to lower the level of a river in flood with a pail, just as it is possible for a single farmer infinitesimally to raise prices by limiting his production, but in both cases the effect is imperceptible, and those who sacrifice themselves in the interest of imperceptible improvements may not even receive the praise normally due selfless behavior.
The argument about large, latent groups, then, does not necessarily
imply self-interested behavior, though such behavior would be completely consistent with it.19 The only requirement is that the behavior

of coordinated effort to bring about the satisfaction of a common interest. Moreover, as was emphasized earlier, the nation-state, with all the emotional loyalty it commands, cannot support itself without compulsion. Therefore it docs not seem likely that many large private groups could support themselves solely through social pressure.

19. Organizations with primarily economic purposes, like labor unions, farm organizations, and other types of pressure groups, normally claim that they are serving the interests of the groups they represent, and do not contend that they are mainly philanthropic organizations out to help other groups. Thus it would be surprising if

of individuals in large groups or organizations of the kind considered should generally be rational, in the sense that their objectives, whether selfish or unselfish, should be pursued by means that are efficient and effective for achieving these objectives.

The foregoing arguments, theoretical and factual, in this and the previous chapter should at the least justify the separate treatment that large and small groups are given in this study. These arguments are not meant as attacks on any previous interpretations of group behavior, though it seems that some of the usual explanations of large voluntary associations may need elaboration because of the theories offered here. All that need be granted, to accept the main argument of this study, is that large or latent groups will not organize for coordinated action merely because, as a group, they have a reason for doing so, though this could be true of smaller groups.

Most of the rest of this study will deal with large organizations and will attempt to prove that most of the large economic organizations in the United States have had to develop special institutions to solve the membership problem posed by the large scale of their objectives.

most of the members of these "interest groups" should always neglect their own, individual interests. An essentially selfish group interest would not normally attract members who were completely selfless. Thus self-interested behavior may in fact be common in organizations of the kind under study. For intelligent arguments contending that self-interested behavior is general in politics, sec James M. Buchanan and Gordon Tullock, The Calculus of Consent (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1962), pp. 3-39. Sec also the interesting book by Anthony Downs, An Economic Theory of Democracy (New York: Harper, 1957), pp. 3-35.





