C. THE TRADITIONAL THEORY OF GROUPS

There is a traditional theory of group behavior that implicitly assumes that private groups and associations operate according to principles entirely different from those that govern the relationships among firms in the maketplace or between taxpayers and the state. This "group theory" appears to be one of the principal concerns of many political scientists in the United States, as well as a major preoccupation of many sociologists and social psychologists.211 This traditional theory of groups, like most other theories, has been developed by different writers with varying views, and there is accordingly an inevitable injustice in any attempt to give a common

24. It does not, however, follow that organized or coordinated group action is always necessary to obtain a collective good. See section D of this chapter, "Small Groups."

25. For a discussion of the importance of "groups" of various sorts and sizes for the theory of politics, see Verba, Small Grrmps and Political Behavior; Truman, Governmental Process; and Bentley, Pro,:-est of Government. For examples of the type of research and theory about groups in social psychology and sociology, sec Group Dynamia, ed. Cartwright and Zander, and Small Groups, ed. Hare, Borgatta, and Bales.

treatment to these different views. Still, the various exponents of the traditional understanding of groups do have a common relationship to the approach developed in the present study. It is therefore appropriate to speak here in a loose way of a single traditional theory, provided that a distinction is drawn between the two basic variants of this theory : the casual variant and the formal variant.
In its most casual form, the traditional view is that private organizations and groups arc ubiquitous, and that this ubiquity is due to a fundamental human propensity to form and join associations. As the famous Italian political philosopher Gaccano Mosca puts it, men have an "instinct" for "herding together and fighting with other herds." This "instinct" also "underlies the formation of all the divisions and subdivisions ... that arise within a given society and occasion moral and, sometimes, physical confl.icts." 28 Aristotle may have had some similar gregarious faculty in mind when he said that man was by nature a palitical animal.27 The ubiquitous and inevitable character of group affiliation was emphasized in Germany by Georg Simmcl, in one of the classics of sociological litcraturc,28 and in America by Arthur Bentley, in one of the best-known works on political scicncc.29 This universal joining tendency or propensity is often thought to have reached its highest intensity in the United Statcs.80 The formal variant of the traditional view also emphasizes the universality of groups, but docs not begin with any "instinct" or "tendency" to join groups. Instead it attempts to explain the associations and group affiliations of the present day as an aspect of the evolution of modern, industrial societies out of the "primitive" societies that preceded them. It begins with the fact that "primary groups" 81-groups so small that each of the members has face-to-face
26. The Ruling Class (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1939), p. 163.

27. Politics i.2.9.1253a. Many others have also emphasized the human propensity towards groups; see Coyle, So<ial Process in Organi:ud Groups; Robert Lowie, S<KUII Organization (New York: Rinehart & Co., 1948); Truman, especially pp. 14-43.

28. Georg Simmel, Conflict and the Web of Group Affiliations, trans. Kurt Wolff and Reinhard Bendix (Glencoe, 111.: Free Press, 1950).
29. Bentley, Process of G011ernment.

30. Alexis de Tocqueville, Democracy in AmeriNZ (New York: New American Library, 1956), p. 198; James Bryce, The American Commonwealth, 4th ed. (New York: Macmillan, 1910), pp. 281-282; Charles A. Beard and Mary R. Beard, The lase of American Civilizlllion, rev. ed. (New York: Macmillan, 1949), pp. 761- 762; and Daniel Bell, The End of ldeolon (Glencoe, Ill.: Free Press, 1960), esp.
p. 30.
31. Charles H. Cooley, So<ial Organization (New York: Charles Scribner'Sona,

relationships with the others-like family and kinship groups are predominant in primitive societies. As Talcott Parsons contends, "it is well-known that in many primitive societies there is a sense in which kinship 'dominates' the social structure; there are few concrete structures in which participation is independent of kinship status." 32 Only small family or kinship type units represent the interests of the individual. R. M. Maciver describes it this way in the Encyclopaedia of the Social Sciences: "Under more simple conditions of society the social expression of interests was mainly through caste or class groups, age groups, kin groups, neighborhood groups, and other unorganized or loosely organized solidarities." 83 Under "primitive" conditions the small, family-type units account for all or almost all human "interaction."

But, these social theorists contend, as society develops, there is structural differentiation: new associations emerge to take on some of the functions that the family had previously undertaken. "As the social functions performed by the family institution in our society have declined, some of these secondary groups, such as labor unions, have achieved a rate of interaction that equals or surpasses that of certain of the primary groups." 34 In Parsons' words, "It is clear that in the more 'advanced' societies a far greater part is played by nonkinship structures like states, churches, the larger business firms, universities and professional societies ... The process by which non-kinship units become of prime importance in the social structure inevitably entails 'loss of function' on the part of some or even all of the kinship units." 35 If this is true, and if, as Maciver claims, "the most marked structural distinction between a primitive society and a civilized society is the paucity of specific associations in the one

1909), p. 23; George C. Homans, The Human Group (New York: Harcourt, Brace, 1950), p. 1; Verba, pp. 11-16.
32. Talcott Parsons and Robert F. Bales, Family (Glencoe, Ill.: Free Press, 1955),
p. 9; sec also Talcott Parsons, Robert F. Bales, and Edward A. Shils, Working Papert in the Theory of Action (Glencoe, Ill.: Free Press, 1953).

33. Maciver in En"cyclopaedia of the Social Sciencet, VII, 144-148, esp. 147. See also Truman, p. 25.

34. Truman, pp. 35-36; sec also Eliot Chapple and Carlton Coon, Principles of Anthropology (New York: Henry Holt, 1942), pp. 443-462.

35. Parsons and Bales, p. 9. See also Bernard Barber, "Participation and Mass Apathy in Associations," in Studies in Leadership, ed. Alvin W. Gouldner (New York: Harper, 1950), pp. 477-505, and Neil J. Smelser, Social Change in the Industrial Revolution (London: Routledge &: Kcgan Paul, 1959).

and their multiplicity in the other," 36 then it would seem that the large association in the modern society is in some sense an equivalent of the small group in the primitive society, and that the large, modern association and the small, primitive group must be explained in terms of the same fundamental source or cause.37

What then is the fundamental source which accounts alike for the small primary groups in primitive societies and the large voluntary association of modern times? This the advocates of the formal variant of the theory have left implicit and unclear. It could be the supposed "instinct" or "tendency" to form and join associations, which is the hallmark of the casual variant of the traditional view; this predilection for forming and joining groups would then manifest itself in small family and kinship groups in primitive societies and in large voluntary associations in modern societies. This interpretation would however probably be unfair to many of the theorists who subscribe to the formal variant of the traditional theory, for many of them doubtless would not subscribe to any theory of "instincts" or "propensities," They are no doubt aware that no explanation whatever is offered when the membership of associations or groups is said to be due to an "instinct" to belong; this merely adds a word, not an explanation. Any human action can be ascribed to an instinct or propensity for that kind of action, but this adds nothing to our knowledge. If instincts or propensities to join groups are ruled out as meaningless, what then could be the source of the ubiquitous groups and associations, large and small, posited by the traditional theory? Probably some of the traditional theorists were thinking in "functional" terms-that is of the functions that groups or associations of different types and sizes can perform. In primitive societies small primary groups prevailed because they were best suited (or at

36. Maciver in Encyclopaedia of the Social Sciencet, VII, 144-148, esp. 147. See also Louis Wirth, "Urbanism as a Way of Life," American Journal of Sociology, XLIV (July 1938), 20; Walter Firey, "Coalition and Schism in a Regional Conservation Program," Human Organization, XV (Winter 1957), 17-20; Herbert Goldhamer, "Social Clubs," in Develo[Jment of Collective Enterpri1e, ed. Seba Eldridge (Lawrence: University of Kansas Press, 1943), p. 163.

37. For a different interpretation of the voluntary association see Oliver Garceau, The Political Life of the American Medical Auociation (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1941), p. 3: "With the advent of political intervention and control, particularly over the economy, it became evident that the formation of policy could not be confined to ballot or legislature. To fill the gap the voluntary group was resorted to, not only by the individual who felt himself alone, but by the government which felt itself ignorant."

least sufficient) to perform certain functions for the people of these societies; in modern societies, by contrast, large associations are supposed to predominate because in modern conditions they alone are capable of performing (or are better able to perform) certain useful functions for the people of these societies. The large voluntary association, for example, could then be explained by the fact that it peformed a function-that is, satisfied a demand, furthered an interest, or met a need-for some large number of people that small groups could not perform (or perform so well) in modern circumstances. This demand or interest provid s an incentive for the formation and maintenance of the voluntary association.

It is characteristic of the traditional theory in all its forms that it assumes that participation in voluntary associations is virtually universal, and that small groups and large organizations tend to attract members for the same reasons. The casual variant of the theory assumed a propensity to belong to groups without drawing any distinctions between groups of different size. Though the more sophisticated variant may be credited with drawing a distinction between those functions that can best be served by small groups and those that can best be served by large associations, it nonetheless assumes that, when there is a need for a large association, a large association will tend to emerge and attract members, just as a small group will when there is a need for a small group. Thus in so far as the traditional theory draws any distinction at all between small and large groups, it is apparently with respect to the scale of the functions they perform, not the extent they succeed in performing these functions or their capacity to attract members. It assumes that small and large groups differ in degree, but not in kind.
But is this true? Is it really the case that small, primary groups
and large associations attract members in the same way, that they are about equally effective in performing their functions, or that they differ only in size but not in their basic character? This traditional theory is called into question by the empirical research which shows that the average person does not in fact typically belong to large voluntary associations and that the allegation that the typical American is a "joiner" is largely a myth.38 It is therefore worth

38. Murray Hausknecht, The /oiners-A Sociological Description of Voluntary Auoci11tion Membership in the United States (New York: Bedminster Press, 1962); Mirra Komaravsky, "The Voluntary Associations of Urban Dwellers," American

asking if it is really true that there is no relation between the size of a group and its coherence, or effectiveness, or appeal to potential members; and whether there is any relation between the size of a group and the individual incentives to contribute toward the achievement of group goals. These are questions which must be answered before the traditional theory of groups can be properly assessed. What needs to be known, in the words of the German sociologist Georg Simmel, is "the bearing which the number of sociated individuals has upon the form of social life." 39

One obstacle, it would seem, to any argument that large and small groups operate according to fundamentally different principles, is the fact, emphasized earlier, that any group or organization, large or small, works for some collective benefit that by its very nature will benefit all of the members of the group in question. Though all of the members of the group therefore have a common interest in obtaining this collective benefit, they have no common interest in paying the cost of providing that collective good. Each would prefer that the others pay the entire cost, and ordinarily would get any benefit provided whether he had borne part of the cost or not. If this is a fundamental characteristic of all groups or organizations with an economic purpose, it would seem unlikely that large organizations would be much different from small ones, and unlikely that there is any more reason that a collective service would be provided for a small group than a large one. Still, one cannot help but feel intuitively that sufficiently small groups would sometimes provide themselves with public goods.

This question cannot be answered satisfactorily without a study of the costs and benefits of alternative courses of action open to individuals in groups of different sizes. The next section of this chapter contains such a study. The nature of this question is such that some of the tools of economic analysis must be used. The following section contains a small amount of mathematics which, though extremely rudimentary, might naturally still be unclear to readers who have never studied that subject. Some points in the following section,

Sociological Review, XI (December 1946), 686-698; Floyd Dotson, "Patterns of Voluntary Membership Among Working Class Families," American Sociological Review, XVI (October 1951), 687; John C. Scott, Jr., "Membership and Participation in Voluntary Associations," American Sociological Review, XXII (June 1957), 315.

39. Georg Simmel, The Sociology of Georg Simmel, trans. Kurt H. Wolff (Glencoe, Ill.: Free Press [1950]), p. 87.

moreover, refer to oligopolistic groups in the marketplace, and the references to oligopoly may interest only the economist. Accordingly, some of the highlights of the following section are explained in an intuitively plausible, though loose and imprecise, way in the "nontechnical summary" of section D, for the convenience of those who might wish to skip the bulk of the following section.



