G. NONECONOMIC LOBBIES

The by-product theory of pressure groups seems to explain the lobbying organizations that represent agriculture, as well as those that represent labor and the professions. And, in connection with the "special interest" theory of small lobbying groups, it helps explain the organizations that represent business interests. The theories developed in this study thus appear to account for the main economic pressure-group organizations.
Although most of the lobbies in Washington, and all of the strongest lobbies, have economic objectives, there are also some lobbies with social, political, religious, or philanthropic objectives. Would the theories developed in this book apply to any of these types of lobbies? Logically, the theory can cover all types of lobbies. The theory is general in the sense that it is not logically limited to any special case. It can be applied whenever there are rational individuals interested in a common goal. As Chapter II explained, the theory of large groups, at least, is not even limited to situations where there is self-interested behavior, or where only monetary or material interests are at stake. Accordingly the generality of the theory is clear; on the other hand it is true that this theory, like any other theory, is less helpful in some cases than in others. It would take too long here to examine in detail any of these lobbies with "noneconomic" interests. But it is evident that the theory sheds new light on some essentially social and political organizations, such as veterans' organizations,90 and that it is not especially useful in studying some

90. The veterans' organizations are not primarily economic organizations, or even political. Their main functions are social, an<l thcv attract most of their members because of the social benefits they provide. The ne n signs in man\' 1\merican cities attest to the face that the local chapters of the veterans' organizations have created

other noneconomic lobbies. The theory is not at all sufficient where philanthropic lobbies, that is, lobbies that voice concern about some group other than the group that supports the lobby, or religious lobbies, are concerned.91 In philanthropic and religious lobbies the relationships between the purposes and interests of the individual member, and the purposes and interests of the organization, may be so rich and obscure that a theory of the sort developed here cannot provide much insight.92

countless clubs, taverns, and dance halls. These are, in general, open only to members and their guests. The veteran gets not only the physical facilities of a club, but also comradeship and recognition for his wartime service by joining a veterans' organization. Anyone who has seen an American Legion convention kows that the Legionnaires do not spend all of their time in solemn discussions of the evils of the United Nations, or even debating the levels of veterans' benefits. They also have parades and diverse other recreational and social activities. In addition, the American Legion offers group insurance benefits to members. All of these social and other benefits go only to those who join: they provide selective incentives. Any veterans' bonus or other benefit that the lobbies of the American Legion or the Veterans of Foreign Wars pressure the government into providing will by contrast go to any veteran, whether he has joined a veterans' organization or not. The political power of the veterans' lobbies is accordingly a by-product of the social and economic services provided by the veterans' organizations.

91. Many theorists simply assume that all individual behavior, whatever the context, is rational, in the sense in which that word is used in economic models. Whenever a person acts, it is assumed that he acted rati,mally to further some "interest" he had, even if the action was philanthropic, for that m ans that the individual got more "utility" (or, better, reached a higher indifference curve) by acting in a philanthropic way than by acting in any other way. All of the situations analyzed so far in this book require no such comprehensive and questionable definition of rationality. But the application of this theory to some noneconomic organizations might require such a comprehensive definition. A charitable organization could best be analyzed if the theory were interpreted in this way; the individual who made a modest contribution to a large nationally organized charity would under this interpretation do so, not from any m,staken belief that his contribution would noticeably augment the resources of the charity, but rather because he got an individual, noncollective satisfaction in the form of a feeling of personal moral worth, or because of a desire for respectability or praise. Although in this way the theory can be applied even to charities, in such a context it does not seem especially useful. For when all action--even charitable action-is defined or assumed to be rational, then this theory (or any other theory) becomes correct simply by virtue of its logical consistency, and is no longer capable of empirical refutation.

92. A religious organization that promised some ulitmate benefit, such as a favorable reincarnation, to the individuals who were faithful followers, and some punishment to persons who did not uphold the religious institution, would be consistent with the theory offered here. The pessimistic, "original sin" conception of human nature common to many religions is also consistent with the theory. It would be logically quite possible to explain some religious lobbies, then, as by-products of

 The theory developed here is also not very useful for the analysis of groups that are characterized by a low degree of rationality, in the sense in which that word is used here. Take for example the occasional band of committed people who continue to work through their organizations for admittedly lost causes. Such a labor of love is not rational, at least from the economic perspective, for it is pointless to make sacrifices which by definition will be ineffective. To say a situation is "lost" or hopeless is in one sense equivalent to saying it is perfect, for in both cases efforts at improvement can bring no positive results. The existence of groups of individuals that work for "lost causes" therefore runs counter to the theory offered in this study (though the insignificance of such groups is of course consistent with the theory).93

Where nonrational or irrational behavior is the basis for a lobby, it would perhaps be better to turn to psychology or social psychology than to economics for a relevant theory. The beginnings of such a theory may already exist in the concept of "mass movements" 94

organizations that provide selective incentives to potential members. The famous Anti-Saloon League, on this interpretation, would have been a by-product of the primary, religious function of the Protestant churches, which were its m3jor source of support. Though logically correct, this approach does not seem very helriful, for it appears to neglect some central features of religious motivation. On the extent of lobbying by churches, see Luke Ebersole, Ch11rch Lobbying in the ,\'ation's Capital (New York: Macmillan, 1951). On the Anti-Saloon League's relationship to the churches see Peter H. Odegard, Pressure Politics (New York: Columbia University Press, 1928).

93. There is probably less rationality, at least in the sense in which that word is used in economics, in noneconomic groups than in economic groups. The easihcalculable relationships and the objective standards of success and failure in economic life probably develop the rational faculties to a greater degree than noneconomic activities do. The theory developed here would accordingly fit economic groups on the whole better than it would fit noneconomic groups. For a development of this point, see Ioseph Schumpeter, Capitalism, Socialism. and Democracy, 4th ed. (London: George Allen & Unwin, 1954), pp. 122-123. Sec also Talcott Parsons, Essays in Sociological Theory, rev. ed. (Glencoe, Ill.: Free Press, 1954), pp. 50-69. On political irrationality, see Graham Wallas, Human Nature in Politics (Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, I 962).

91. Mass movements are often utopian in character. Even large groups that work fnr a utopia could have a reason for acting as a group, even in terms of the thenry offered here. Utopias are heavens on earth, in the eyes of their advocate,; in other words, they are expected to bring benefits that are incalculably large or probably infinite. If the benefit that would cnnic from establishing a utopia is infinite, it could be rational even for the member of a large group to contribute voluntarily to the achievement of the group goal (the utopia). A minute share of an infinite benefit,

( which, incidentally, are usually not very massive). The adherents of "mass movements" are usually explained in terms of their "alienation" from society.915 This alienation produces a psychological disturbance or disequilibrium. The support for "mass movements" can accordingly be explained mainly in psychological terms, though the psychological disturbances are in turn related to various characteristics of the social structure. A fanatic devotion to an ideology or leader is common in mass movements, and many of these movements are often said to be on the "lunatic fringe." 96 This sort of lobby is more common in periods of revolution and upheaval, and in unstable countries, than it is for stable, well-ordered, and apathetic societies that have seen the "end of ideology." 97
There is to be sure always some ideologically oriented behavior in
any society, and among even the most stabl,: and well-adjusted groups. In the United States at present much of this behavior centers around the political parties. Yet it is striking how relatively minor the ideological sacrifices for the political parties in the United States are. Political scientists often comment upon the organizational weaknesses of the political parties. American parties are usually important only as names and categories, not as formal organizations. As one well-known political scientist said, "the quadrennial creation of presidential parties is an exercise in improvisation." 98 This is not to deny

or a minuscule increase in the probability of such a benefit, could exceed an indivi<lual's share of the cost of the group endeavor. An incalculably large or infinite benefit could as it were make a "privileged group" out of a rather large grour. Religious groups might also be analyzed in this way. But again, it is not clear that this is the best way of theorizing about either utopian or religious grours.

95. William Kornhauser, The Politics of Mau Society (Glencoe, Ill.: Free Press, 1959).

96. Eric Hoffer, The True Believer (New York: New American Library, 1958); Peter F. Drucker, The End of Economic Man-A Study of the New Totalita,-ianism (New York: John Day, 1939); Seymour Martin Lipset, Political .l\,fan: The Social Bases of Politics (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1960).

97. Daniel Bell, The End of Ideology (Glencoe, Ill.: Free Press, 1960); see also Harold D. Lasswell, Politics-Who Gets What, When, How (New York: Whittlesey House, 1936). A detailed study of a community in Southern Italy, an area with a political culture profoundly different from that of the United States, suggests however that the theory offered here fits that culture very well: see E<lward C. Banfield, The Moral Basis of a Backward Society (Glencoe, Ill.: Free Press, 1958).

98. David B. Truman, The Governmental Process (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1958), p. 532. The late V. 0. Key argued that at the state party level the typical situation "is the almost complete absence of a functioning statewide organization. There may be informal cliques that operate by and large in the background. There

the decisive role that parties play in American politics. Even in twoparty states the majority of the votes a candidate gets are apt to come from people who voted for him because of his party affiliation rather than his personal qualifications. In many states a candidate cannot feasibly get his name on the ballot unless he has the nomination of a major party. But despite the important role of the two major parties, they do not amount to much as formal organizations: they do not have many "members"-many who regularly attend precinct meetings or contribute to the party treasury (except for the political "machines" in some big cities). Nor do the political parties have large staffs, by comparison with, say, the labor unions.99 Between 1924 and 1928, the Democratic party did not even maintain a national headquarters.100 Yet a "very conservative estimate" by an authority put the number of organizations with permanent lobbies in Washington in the late twenties at "well over 500" (there are many more now).101 That any one of a vast number of pressure groups, each representing a relatively small proportion of the American population, should amount to more as a formal organization than either of the great political parties, whose fortunes affect among other things the prospects of every pressure group, is surely a paradox.

One explanation is that political parties usually seek collective benefits: they strive for governmental policies which, as they say, will help all of the people (or at least a large number of them). Though most people feel they would be better off if their party were in power, they recognize that if their party is going to win, it will as likely win without them, and they will get the benefits in any case. The average American has about the same attitude towards his political party that Dr. Johnson said the English people had toward the exiled Stuarts in the eighteenth century. Johnson said that "if England were fairly polled, the present king would be sent away tonight, and his adherents hanged tomorrow." They would not,

may be local organizations that exert power. Yet organizations prepared to cope responsibly with statewide matters with a statewide view are the exception. Often party is in a sense a fiction." Quotation from Key's American State PoliticI: An
/ntrod11ction (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1956), p. 271.

99. Perhaps one reason why political parties employ small staffs is that many of their professional workers and leaders are government officials or employees.

100. Arthur Schlesinger, Jr., The Criiis of the Old Order (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, I 957), p. 273.
IOI. Herring (note 37, above), p. 19.

however, "risk anything to restore the exiled family. They would not give twenty shillings to bring it about. But if a mere vote could do it, there would be twenty to one."102 The point is that the average person will not be willing to make a significant sacrifice for the party he favors, since a victory for his party provides a collective good. He will not contribute to the party coffers or attend precinct meetings. There are on the other hand many people with personal political ambitions, and for them the party will provide noncollective benefits in the form of public office. Since 700,000 officials are elected in this country, the latter group is quite important. There are also many businessmen who contribute to the political parties in order to get individual access to officials when matters of importance to their own firms arise.

Political "machines," on the other hand, have massive organizational structures. But the political machines do not work for collective

I 02. The point Johnson mentioned shows on the cost side a parallel to the "unnoticed" or "imperceptible" benefits that have been discussed throughout this study, and this parallel is important to an explanation of voting. The action of the firm in the perfectly competitive market will have some effect on the market price, but this effect is so small the individual firm neglects it, or fails to perceive it altogether. The typical member of a labor union who will not pay his dues voluntarily, but who will without thought bear the "cost" of casting a vote for a union shop, is acting in the same way. So are the millions of people who do not contribute any time or money to their political party, but who nonetheless sometimes vote for it. So are those who vote on a sunny day, but not when it rains. The cost of voting and signing petitions is thus insignificant and imperceptible to many people, in something roughly like the same way that a competitive firm's effect on price is insignificant and imperceptible to it. The point is that there is a "threshold" above which costs and returns influence a person's action, and below which they do not. This "threshold" concept may also be explained by a physical analogy. Suppose a man's hand is placed in a vise and the vise is tightened. The man will feel pain, and as the vise is tightened further, he will feel more intense pain, and presumably try to free his hand. But while high pressure against a hand is painful and induces a reaction, a very low level of pressure will have no such effect. The small amount of pressure on the hand involved in a handshake will normally inflict no pain whatever, and will not lead to any reaction in any way similar to the reaction caused by the amount of pressure applied in the vise. The pressure must reach a certain level, or threshold, before any reaction occurs. Some detailed empirical investigations into voting in one American community brought results that are consistent with the foregoing analysis. The investigators found that "the majority of the people vote, but in general they do not give evidence of sustained interest ...	even the party workers are not typically motivated by ideological concerns or plain civic duty." Bernard R. Bcrelson, Paul F. Lazarsfel<l, and William N. McPhee, Voting (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1954), p. 307.

The fact that voting costs often fall below the threshold and are ignored suggests a way in which the Bentley-Truman "group theory" could be modified and corrected. If the lobbies or pressure groups that have been its major preoccupation were left

goods. A machine is at best interested in patronage, and at worse in outright graft. The workers who keep the precincts in line for a machine are usually interested in getting jobs in city hall. And each party hack knows he will not get a job if he does not aid the machine. Political machines are able to develop well-articulated organizational structures, then, because they strive mainly for benefits that accrue to particular individuals, rather than for the common interests of any large group.103 It is surely significant that in the language of American party politics, "organization" is often used as a synonym for "political machine," and a "political machine" is assumed to be interested mainly in the individual benefits it can win for its members.



