A. COERCION IN LABOR UNIONS

In this age of big business and big labor, most labor unions are large organizations. But it was not always so. The first labor unions were small, local organizations, and they remained small and local for some time. The American labor movement began as a series of small unions with local interests, each independent of the others. (This incidentally was also true in Great Britain.1) The development of viable national unions in the United States took over half a century after local unions had emerged; and, even after national unions had been established, it was some time before they superseded the local unions as the main manifestation of labor's strength. Many of the earlier national unions, such the Knights of Labor, failed. It was not only true that local unions were formed well before national unions; it was also significant that these first unions emerged, not in the larger factories, but in the smaller workplaces, so that the early unions were not nearly as large as some modern union locals. Unions are naturally supposed to have the greatest function to perform in the large factory, where there can be no personal relationships between employer and employee, and it is in such factories that many of the powerful unions are found today. Yet the early unions sprang up, not in the factories being spawned by the industrial revolution, but mainly in the building trades, in printing, in shoemaking, and in other industries characterized by small-scale production. The vast factories of the steel industry, the automobile industry, and the like were among the last workplaces organized. The usual explanation is that skilled workers are supposed to be the most amenable to organization, and they were perhaps more common in smaller firms. But this explanation at best cannot be the whole story, for the coalmining industry has been dominated by unskilled workers, and yet

1. G. D. H. Cole, A Short Hirtory of the British Working Class Movement, 1789- 1947, new ed. (London: George Allen & Unwin, 1948), pp. 35-43.

the small-scale firms of this industry were organized long before the great industrial giants.2

There may be many different factors that help to account for this historical pattern of labor-union growth, but that pattern may be explained at least partly by the fact that small groups can better provide themselves with collective goods than large groups. The higher wages, shorter hours, and better working conditions that unions demand are collective goods to the workers. The sacrifices required to create and maintain an effective union are moreover quite considerable, for a continuing organization must be supported, and the strike that is the union's major weapon requires that each worker normally forego his entire income until the employer comes to terms. Small unions may have a further advantage over larger unions stemming from the fact that they can be meaningful social and recreational units, and thus also offer noncollective social benefits that attract members. The social aspect seems to have been significant in a number of the earliest unions.8 For these reasons it may be significant that in their earlier days, when they faced the resistance of inertia and an especially hostile environment, unions began as small and independent local units and remained so for some time.

Once a local union exists, there are, however, several forces that may drive it to organize all of its craft or industry, or to federate with other local unions in the same craft or industry. Market forces work against any organization that operates only in a part of a market. Employers often will not be able to survive if they pay higher wages than competing firms. Thus an existing union often has an interest in seeing that all firms in any given market are forced to pay union wage scales. When only part of an industry or skill group is organized, employers also have a ready source of strikebreakers. In addition, workers with a given skill who migrate from one community

2. See Lloyd Ulman, The Rise of the National Trade Union (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1955); Robert Ozanne, "The Labor History and Labor Theory of John R. Commons: An Evaluation in the Light of Recent Trends and Criticism," in Labor, Management, and Social Policy, ed. Gerald G. Somers (Madison:
University of Wisconsin Press, 1963), pp. 25-46; Norman J. Ware, The Labor Movement in the United States, 1860-95 (New York: D. Appleton, 1929); Richard A. Lester, Economics of Labor, 2nd ed. (New York: Macmillan, 1964), pp. 55-116.

3. Foster Rhea Dulles, Labor in America: A History (New York: Thomas Y. Crowell, 1949), p. 23. G. D. H. Cole points out that the early English unions often met in inns or pubs, which suggests a significant social aspect. See his Working Class Movement, pp. 35 and 174.

to another have an interest in belonging to a national union that gives them access to employment in each new community. Finally, the political strength of a large union is obviously greater than that of a small one. The incentives to federate local unions and organize unorganized firms increase considerably as improvements in transportation and communication enlarge the market.4

The attempts to create large, national unions arc accordingly understandable. But how can the success of some of these attempts to provide collective goods to large, latent groups be explained? By far the most important single factor enabling large, national unions to survive was that membership in those unions, and support of the strikes they called, was to a great degree compulsory.

The "union shop," the "closed shop," and other such instruments for making union membership compulsory are not, as some suppose, modern inventions. About sixty years ago Sidney and Beatrice Webb pointed out that the closed shop was even then a venerable institution in England. In words that fit contemporary America quite as well, they attacked the "strange delusion in the journalistic mind that this compulsory trade unionism ... is a modern device." Compulsory union membership was something "any student of trade union annals knows to be ... coeval with trade unionism itself," they said. "The trade clubs of handicraftsmen in the eighteenth century would have scouted the idea of allowing any man to work at their trade who is not a member of the club . . . It is, in fact, as impossible for a non-unionist plater or rivetter to get work in a Tyneside shipyard, as it is for him to take a house in Newcastle without paying the rates [property taxes]. This silent and unseen, but absolutely complete compulsion, is the ideal of every Trade Union." 11 Compulsory unionism has retained its "silent and unseen" character in Britain to the present, and the "right-to-work" question is hardly a live issue there.6
4. Ulman, passim; Lloyd G. Reynolds, Labor Economics and Labor Relations, 3rd
ed. (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1959), pp. 140-142.

5. Sidney and Beatrice Webb, Industrial Democracy (London: Longmans, Green, 1902), pp. 214-215. John Head has called my attention to the fact that some of the English classical economists, presumably observing the difficulties of early English trade unions, recognized that unions needed compulsion, or at least powerful social sanctions, to perform their functions. See John Stuart Mill, Principles of Political Economy, Book V, chap. xi, section 12, and Henry Sidgwick, The Principles of Political Economy (London: Macmillan, 1883), pp. 355-360.
6. Allan Flanders, "Great Britain," in Comparativ,: Labor Movements, ed. Walter


In the early years of the American labor movement, too, the closed shop was enforced whenever possible by the labor unions, though the specific contractual union-shop guarantees that now are typical did not normally exist then. For example, in 1667 in New York City the carters, predecessors of the teamsters, apparently obtained a closed shop.7 And in 1805 the constitution of the New York Cordwainers (shoemakers) declared that no member could work for anyone who had any cordwainers in his employ who were not members of the union,8 In printing the closed shop was fully developed by 1840.9 "If all the available evidence is summed up," says one student of the question, "it may be said that practically every trade union prior to the civil war was in favor of excluding non-members from employment." 10

In sum, compulsory unionism, far from being a modern innovation, goes back to the earliest days of organized labor, and existed even in the small, pre-national unions. Compulsory membership cannot, however, explain the creation or emergence of the first, small, local unions, as it can account for the viability of the later, larger, national unions that the local unions ultimately created. Compulsory membership implies some instrument or organization to make membership compulsory, that is, to enforce the rule that nonunion members may not work in a given workplace. It is not possible for unorganized workers to create a large union, even if they are aware of the need for coercion, since they have to organize first in order to have an organization that will enforce the union-shop policy. But
Galenson (New York: Prentice-Hall, 1952), pp. 24-26; W. E. J. McCarthy, Tiu: Cloud Shop in Britain (Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1964).

7. Jerome Toner, The Cloud Shop (Washington, D.C.: American Council on Public Affairs, 1942), pp. 1-93, and esp. p. 60. Toner points out that the medieval guilds were essentially closed shops. The closed-shop practices of labor unions developed independently, however.
8. Ibid., p. 64.

9. F. T. Stockton, The Cloud Shop in American Trade Unions, Johns Hopkins University Studies in Historical and Political Science, series 29, no. 3 (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press, 1911), p. 23. See also John R. Commons and Associates, History of Labour in the United States (New York: Macmillan, 1946), I, 598.

10. Stockton, p. 68. For a different view about the prevalence of compulsory membership in the history of American unionism, see Philip D. Bradley, "Freedom of the Individual under Collectivized Labor Arrangements," in The Public Stake in Union Power, ed. Philip D. Bradley (Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press, 1959), pp. 153-156. But Bradley's curious, polemical essay shows such an unthinking bias against the closed shop, and such confused arguments, that there is no reason to give his conclusion any weight.

it is possible for a small union to emerge without compulsion, and then, if it so decides, to ensure its survival and increase its strength by making membership compulsory. Once a union exists, it may be able to expand in size, or combine with other unions, in order to represent large groups of workers, if it has compulsory membership. The early use of coercion in labor unions is not therefore in any way inconsistent with the hypothesis that unionism had to begin with small groups in small-scale firms.

In view of the importance of compulsory membership, and the fact that strikebreakers are legally free to cross picket lines and make any strike ineffective, it should not be surprising that violence has had a prominent place in the history of labor relations, especially in periods when there were attempts to create or expand large, national unions.11 This violence has involved employers with mercenary gangs as well as workers. (Jay Gould boasted: "I can hire one half of the working class to kill the other half." 12) As Daniel Bell points out, "Beginning with the railroad strikes of 1877 ... almost every major strike for the next forty years was attended by an outbreak of violence." This he ascribes to the "Social Darwinism" in American thought, which accounted for an "integrated value system" that "sanctioned industry's resistance to unionism." 13 No doubt fanatical ideologues among employers and their friends accounted for some

11. "The threat of potential violence and intimidation through the device of the picket line are powerful factors---so powerful, in fact, that nowadays a firm rarely attempts any operations at all if a strike has been called, although it would be within its legal rights to do so. For all practical purposes the alternative of making a bargain with anyone other than the union has been removed." Quotation from Edward H. Chamberlin, "Can Union Power Be Curbed?" Atlantic Monthly (June 1959), p. 49. See also Robert V. Bruce, 1877: Year of Violence (Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 1959); Stewart H. Holbrook, The Rocky Mountain Revolution (New York: Henry Holt, I 956). For a vigorous polemic that includes lurid and interesting accounts of the bloodiest strikes, as seen from the far left, see Louis Adamic, Dynamite: The Story of Clau Violence in America, rev. ed. (New York: Viking Press, 1934).
12. Herbert Harris, American Labor (New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press,
1939), p. 228.
13. Daniel Bell, The End of Ideology (Glencoe, Ill.: Free Press, 1960), pp. 195-
197. In Atchison, T. & S.F. Ry. v. Gu, 139 Fed. 584 (C.C.S.D. Iowa, 1905), the court stated: "There is and can be no such thing as peaceful picketing, any more than there can be chaste vulgarity, or peaceful mobbing, or lawful lynching. When men want to converse or persuade, they do not organize a picket line." This is an extreme view-the Supreme Court has since legalized peaceful picketing-but one that has an element of truth in it, especially for the days before labor legislation allowed unions to organize a factory merely by winning a representation election. See also Georges Sorel, Reflections on Violence, trans. T. E. Hulme (New York: B. W. Huebsch, n.d.), esp. pp. 43 and 289.

violence, but since the more radical political movements did not usually occasion similar amounts of violence, this must not have been the ultimate cause. The conservative or "business unionism" philosophy typical of American labor unions was no doubt less offensive to conservative ideologues than communism, socialism, or anarchism; yet it seems to have led to much more violence. The correct explanation surely centers around the need for coercion implicit in attempts to provide collective goods to large groups. If some workers in a particular firm go out on strike, the supply function for labor tends to shift to the left; so for those who continue working, or for outside strikebreakers, wages will if anything be higher than they were before. By contrast, for the duration of the conflict the strikers get nothing. Thus all the economic incentives affecting individuals are on the side of those workers who do not respect the picket lines. Should it be surprising, then, that coercion should be applied to keep individual workers from succumbing to the temptation to work during the strike? And that antiunion employers should also use violence?

Violence is apparently the greatest when unions first try to organize a firm.14 If the employer's forces win the early tests of strength, the union is apt to disappear and peace will be re-established. If the union wins, the hazards of "scabbing" will likewise be evident and workers will soon make it a habit not to cross picket lines, thereby bringing a period of peaceful collective bargaining.

Compulsory membership and picket lines are therefore of the essence of unionism. As Henry George put it: "Labor associations can do nothing to raise wages but by force; it may be force applied passively, or force applied actively, or force held in reserve, but it must be force; they must coerce or hold the power to coerce employers; they must coerce those among their members disposed to straggle; they must do their best to get into their hands the whole field of labor they seek to occupy and to force other workingmen either to join them or to starve. Those who tell you of trades unions bent on raising wages by moral suasion alone are like those who would tell you of tigers who live on oranges.'' 111 The argument that collective bargaining implies coercion need not be used to attack unions. It can equally well be used to contend, as some students of

14. Bell, pp. 195-197.
15. Henry George, The Condition of Labor: An Open Letter to Pope Leo Xlll
(New York: United States Book Co., 1891), p. 86.

the labor movement have contended, that when the majority of the workers in a particular bargaining unit vote to go out on strike, all of the workers in that unit should be barred by law from flouting the majority decision by attempting to continue working.16 This would leave compulsion to the police and prevent mob violence.

In addition to compulsory membership, picket lines, and violence, some unions have also had selective incentives of a positive kind: they have offered noncollective benefits to those who join the union, and denied these benefits to any who do not. In certain special cases these noncollective goods have been important. Some large labor unions have offered various forms of insurance to those who join the union. Significantly, the first large, national union to prove viable in Great Britain was the Amalgamated Society of Engineers, established in 1851, which offered a wide range of noncollective benefits. As G. D. H. Cole explained:

The Amalgamated Society of Engineers is commonly acclaimed as a "New Model" in Trade Union organization ... It became the model for a whole series of "Amalgamated" Societies formed during the next twenty years.

The essential basis of the "New Model" was a close combination of trade and friendly activities. The A.S.E. provided for all its members a wide range of benefits, ranging from dispute and unemployment benefit to sickness and superannuation benefit ... In short, it was a Trade Union and a Friendly Society almost in equal measure.17

The railroad brotherhoods in the United States have at times also attracted members by providing insurance benefits to those who joined the union. In the early days of the railroad unions accident rates were high and many insurance companies did not sell insurance to railroad workers. Thus the fraternal insurance benefits of the railroad brotherhoods offered potential members a considerable incentive for joining. In its early years the conductors' union went so far as to emphasize its insurance program to the virtual exclusion of all else.18

16. See Neil W. Chamberlain, "The Problem of Union Security," Proceedings of the Academy of Political Science, XXVI (May 1954), 1-7, which was also published by the Academy of Political Science as a booklet edited by Dumas Malone and entitled The Right to Work,
17. Cole, Working Class Movement, p. 173.

18. Toner, pp. 93-114. Sec also J. Douglas Brown, "The History and Problems of Collective Bargaining by Railway Maintenance of Way Employees," unpub. diss.,
Princeton University, 1927, pp. 36-38, 69-70, 222.


There were periods, however, when the insurance programs of some of the railroad unions lost money. Then they had to rely mainly on the seniority rule to hold membership. Union members were guaranteed seniority rights in the unions' contracts with the railroad companies, but nonunion workers had to depend on the good will of the railroad companies for any rights of seniority. It is significant that the railroad unions were for certain periods the only major national unions without some form of compulsory membership. The newspaper of the Brotherhood of Locomotive Engineers put it this way: "The closed shop in the industries bears the same relation to the shop craft unions as the senior rule does to the train service brotherhoods. They are the backbone of both and if either are broken down they are no longer effective for collective bargaining. In fact, it would be impossible to maintain an organization today without them." 19
It seems difficult to find more than a few examples of large unions
that have supported themselves primarily by providing noncollective benefits, such as insurance or seniority privileges. On the other hand, most unions do provide something in the way of noncollective benefits, such as insurance, welfare benefits, and seniority rights.20 A few unions help their members find employment. More important, almost every union handles members' grievances against the employer; that is, it attempts to protect each member against too much (or too little) overtime, against a disproportionate share of the most unpleasant work, against arbitrary foremen, and the like. While unions may process grievances for nonunion members as well, partly to impress them with the usefulness of the union, the nonmember is no doubt aware that his grievance against management may some day be the last to be acted upon if he persists indefinitely in staying out of the union.21

19. T. P. Whelan, "The Open Shop Crusade," Locomotive Engineers' Journal,
LVI (1922), p. 44.
20. The House of Labor, ed. J, B. S. Hardman and Maurice F. Neufeld (New
York: Prentice-Hall, 1951), pp, 276-319.

21. Leonard R. Sayles and George Strauss, The Local Union (New York: Harper, 1953), pp. 27-80; George Rose, "The Processing of Grievances," Virginia Labor Review, XXXVIII (April 1952), 285-314; Labor and Industrial Relations Center, Michigan State University, The Gn'e11ance Process (1956). For quotations from conversations with union members who felt that nonmembers' "gripes" or grievances "won't have any backing," sec Joel Seidman, Jack London, and Bernard Karsh, "Why Workers Join Unions," Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, CCLXXIV (March 1951), 83, and also McCarthy (note 6 above), p. 93.


Finally, many national unions draw some strength from federation, that is from the fact that their members belong to small union locals, and thus at one stage have the advantages of the small group. The small groups, in turn, can be held in the national union through noncollective benefits provided to the locals by the national union. The national may provide a staff of experts upon which the local unions may draw, and may offer the locals what might perhaps be called "strike insurance" in the form of a centrally administered strike fund. The national may also provide a noncollectivc benefit to some members directly by arranging for members of a local union who migrate to another community to get access to employment and membership in the local branch of the union in the new community. With the growth of large-scale industry and the penetration of unions into large manufacturing enterprises in recent times, the small local that was once a major source of strength is becoming less important. Now many union members belong to locals with over a thousand members-to locals so large they are no longer small groups. Moreover the national unions are taking over the functions that union locals once performed.22 Ordinarily no union local with thousands, or perhaps even hundreds, of members can be an effective social unit. A detailed empirical study of some
modern union locals had this finding:

A few unions try to provide a full recreational program for their members as well as protection at work. However, the locals we observed found it impractical to compete with the established social activities in the community. To be sure, a picnic for the entire family in the summer and a dance in the winter will be successful, particularly if the local itself foots a large part of the bill. In fact it was not unusual to observe a union appropriating 10 percent of its treasury for a social affair "so that the members will feel they're getting something for their dues." Parties for the children at Christmas are also popular, but this was the extent of such social activities.28

Thus it appears that in many unions (though certainly not all) in the present day, not much strength can be gained from constituent small groups, since even the local units are sometimes large, and with the growth of the average local a union may also not be able to support itself any longer by providing social benefits.

22. Albert Recs, Tiu: Economics of Trade Unions (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1962), pp. 4-7; Reynolds (note 4, above), pp. 40-43.
23. Sayles and Strauss, p. 11.


Probably also the growth of social security and unemployment insurance, sponsored by government, and the proliferation of private insurance companies have made union insurance schemes much less useful for attracting members than they once were. This sort of selective incentive could in any case be provided only in unions with very good business judgment, and it seems that only a few American unions have survived by this means. The noncollective benefits provided through union action on individual members' grievances have also been limited in recent decades by the legal requirement that a union must fairly represent all workers in a given group whether or not they belong to the union. In return for the right to "exclusive jurisdiction" a union is legally required to represent every worker within its jurisdiction.24 Though it is presumably impossible to ensure that the nonmember's grievances get represented with as much vigor as the member's grievances, this legal requirement must nonetheless reduce the incentive to join a union in order to get action on grievances.
In short, most unions can no longer draw a great deal of strength
from small groups, and a union's noncollective benefits cannot usually be sufficient to bring in very many members. Smallness and noncollective benefits can probably now explain only the exceptional union. In most cases it is compulsory membership and coercive picket lines that are the source of the union's membership. Compulsory membership is now the general rule. In recent years roughly 95 per cent of the unionized workers have been covered by various types of "union security" (or sometimes dues check-off) schemes that normally make it impossible, or at least in practice exceedingly difficult, for a worker to avoid being a member of the union under whose jurisdiction he falls.2 There are admittedly "right-to-work"


24. For an interesting explanation of this requirement sec N. W. Chamberlain, "Problem of Union Security," and also Sumner H. Slichter, The Challenge of Industrial Relations (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1947), pp. 8-14.

25. Orme W. Phelps, Union Security (Los Angeles: Institute of Industrial Relations, University of California, 1953), p. 50; Toner, p. 91; Philip D. Bradley in Public Stake in Union Power, pp. 143 ff., and the same author's ln11oluntary Participation in Unionism (Washington, D.C.: American Enterprise Association, Inc., 1956); Reynolds, p. 202; E. Wight Bakke, Clark Kerr, and Charles W. Anrod, Unions, Management, and the Public, 2nd ed. (New York: Harcourt, Brace, & World, 1960), pp. 96-11 I. On the great degree of compulsion existing even when there is no closed or union shop, see Seidman, London, and Karsh, "Why Workers Join Unions," pp. 75-84, especially the sections entitled ''Joining Despite Opposition," "Dues Inspection Linc," and "Forcing Nonmembers to Join,"

76	The Logic of Collectit1e Action
Jaws in a number of states (almost all of them nonindustrial states), but these laws are seldom enforced.26

This general reliance on compulsory membership should be expected, for labor unions are typically large organizations that strive for benefits for large or latent groups. A labor union works primarily to get higher wages, better working conditions, legislation favorable to workers, and the like; these things by their very nature ordinarily cannot be withheld from any particular worker in the group represented by the union. Unions are for "collective bargaining," not individual bargaining. It follows that most of the achievements of a union, even if they were more impressive than the staunchest unionist claims, could offer the rational worker no incentive to join; his individual efforts would not have a noticeable effect on the outcome, and whether he supported the union or not he would still get the benefits of its achievements. The following parts of this chapter will therefore neglect the occasional union that is a small group, and neglect the cases where unions can support themselves by providing very attractive noncollective goods, and will discuss some theories and controversies about labor unions on the oversimplified, but surely basically correct, assumption that unions are, and since they became national organizations have been, institutions working mainly for the common interests of large groups of workers.



