C. PROFESSIONAL LOBBIES

Many of those who criticize organized labor because of the coercion entailed in labor unions are themselves members of professional organizations that depend upon compulsion as much as unions do. Many organizations representing prosperous and prestigious professions like the law and medicine have also reached for the forbidden fruits of compulsory membership. There is in fact a pervasive tendency towards compulsion in professional associations generally. "The trend," writes Frances Delancey, "is toward the professional guild." 12 This is what many other scholars have also observed. "A characteristic of the politics of the professional association," according
to V. 0. Key, "is their tendency to seek the reality, if not invariably the form, of a guild system." 13 J. A. C. Grant argues that the guild "has returned. Its purposes are the same as in the Middle Ages." 14
The guild form of organization is often adopted not only by the ancient and learned professions, but also by undertakers, barbers, "beauticians," "cosmeticians," plumbers, opticians, and other groups interested in professional status.111This adoption of the guild form of
11. B. C. Roberts, Trade Union Government and Administration in Great Britain
(Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1956), pp. 369-380 and 551-553;
G.D. H. Cole, A Short History of the British Working Class Movement, 1789-1947, new ed. (London: George Allen & Unwin, 1948), pp. 296-299, 310-315, 423-424; Charles Mowat, Britain Between the Wars (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1955), pp. 336-337; and Martin Harrison, Trade Unions and the Labour Party Since 1945 (London: Ruskin House, George Allen & Unwin, 1960), passim.
12. Frances Priscilla DeLancey, The Licrosing of Professions in Wut Virginia
(Chicago: Foundation Press, 1938), p. 140.
13. Key, p. 136.

14. J. A. C. Grant, "The Gild Returns to America," /ournal of Politics, IV (August 1942), 316.
15. Grant, "The Gild Returns to America, II," ibid., IV (November 1942), 463-
476.

organization is evidence for the by-product theory of large pressure groups, for compulsory membership has always been, Grant points out, "the first rule" of the guild system.16

The self-regulating guild with compulsory membership has reached its furthest degree of development in many state bar associations. Many state legislatures have been induced to require by law that every practicing lawyer must be a member of the state bar association.17 These bar associations have closed shops enforced by government, and thus should be the envy of every labor union.

The modern professional associations or guilds are moreover coming to resemble "miniature governments." 18 They have "all the types of power normally exercised by government." 19 State governments often give the professional groups authority to govern themselves ( and to a degree their clients) and to discipline any members of the profession that do not maintain the "ethical" standards the profession finds it expedient or appropriate to maintain. It follows that, even when membership in these associations is not a legal requirement, the individual in professional practice knows that he has an interest in maintaining membership in good standing with the professional association.

The advantages of maintaining membership and good relationships with a professional association may be illustrated by the fact that it was not found expedient to release the name of a doctor who had written to a congressional committee to argue that "the central organization of the AMA in Chicago has no idea what the average physician wants his patients to have." 20 Oliver Garceau, author of the classic work on the American Medical Association, has argued that the recalcitrant doctor in trouble with organized medicine may face "a genuine economic threat." 21 When the American Medical Association blocked the Denver city council's program for Denver General Hospital in 1945, a Denver councilman, according to Time magazine, was driven to exclaim: "Nobody can touch the American
16. Grant's first installment (August 1942), 304.

17. M. Louise Rutherford, The Influence of the American Bar Association on Public Opinion and Legislation (Philadelphia, 1937), pp. 32-34; McKean, p. 568.
18. Grant (August 1942), 324.
19. Ibid.

20. U.S. Congress, House Committee on Interstate and Foreign Commerce, 83d Cong., 2d Sess., Health Inquiry, Part 7 (1954), p. 2230, quoted in Key, p. 139.

21. Oliver Garceau, The Political Life of the American Medical Association (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1941), pp. 95, 103.

Medical Association ... Talk about the closed shop of the AFL and the CIO-they are a bunch of pikers." 22
The role of coercion, even in its subtler forms, in the American
Medical Association is, however, probably less important as a source of membership than the noncollective benefits the organization provides its membership. According to Garceau, there is "one formal service of the society with which the doctor can scarcely dispense. Malpractice defense has become a prime requisite to private practice." 23 One doctor who had founded a cooperative hospital, and lost his membership in his medical society, discovered that not only had he lost his chance to have other doctors testify in his behalf during malpractice suits, but that he had lost his insurance as well.24 The many technical publications of the American Medical Association, and the state and local medical societies, also give the doctor a con-
22. Time (Feb. 19, 1945), p. 53, quoted in McKean, p. 564.
23. Garceau, p. !03.

24. Ibid., p. 104. Those who are not members of thier local medical societies can, now at least, usually get malpractice insurance, though they must apparently pay higher rates. One student of the economics of medicine, Reuben Kessel, describes the situation in this way:

"County medical societies play a crucial role in protecting their members against malpractice suits. Physicians charged with malpractice arc tried by their associates in the private judicial system of organized medicine. If found innocent, then local society members arc available for duty as expert witnesses in the defense of those charged with malpractice. Needless to say, comparable services by society members for plaintiffs in such actions are not equally available. By virtue of this monopoly over the services of expert witnesses and the tacit coalition of the members of a society in the defense of those charged with malpractice, the successful prosecution of malpractice suits against society members is extremely difficult.

"On the other hand, for doctors who are persona-non-grata with respect to organized medicine, the shoe is on the other foot. Expert witnesses from the ranks of organized medicine are abundantly available for plaintiffs but not for defendants. Therefore the position of the plaintiff in a suit against a non-society member is of an order of magnitude stronger than it is for a suit against a society member. Consequently it should come as no surprise that the costs of malpractice insurance for non-society members is substantially higher than it is for society members. Apparently some non-society members have experienced difficulty in obtaining malpractice insurance at any price."

Kessell also argues that the nonmember of the county medical society may have difficulty getting on a hospital staff. "This control over hospitals by the AMA has been used to induce hospitals to abide by the Mundt Resolution. This resolution advises hospitals that are certified for intern training that their staff ought to be composed solely of members of local medical societies. As a result of this AMA control over hospitals, membership in local medical societies is a matter of enormous importance to practicing physicians. Lack of membership implies inability to become a member of a hospital staff." Reuben Kessell, "Price Discrimination in Medicine," fourna/ of Law and Economics, I (October 1958), 2-53, esp. 30--31 and 44-45.

140	The Logic of Collectit1e Action
siderable incentive to affiliate with organized medicine. The American Medical Association publishes not only its celebrated Journal, but also many other technical periodicals on various medical specialties. Since the nineteenth century the Journal alone has provided a "tangible attraction for doctors." 25 The importance of this attraction is perhaps indicated by a survey conducted in Michigan, which showed that 89 per cent of the doctors received the Journal of the American Medical Association, and 70 per cent read a state society journal, but less than 30 per cent read any other type of medical literature.26 The Journal has been, moreover, the "prime money maker of the organization." 27 Much of the organization's revenue, according to Garceau, comes from drug companies' advertisementsadvertisements which Garceau believes helped companies obtain the AMA seal of approval for their products.28 The conventions of the American Medical Association and many of its constituent organizations also provide technical information needed by doctors, and thus give the member a "direct return in education" 29 for the investment in dues, just as the medical journals do.
In short, by providing a helpful defense against malpractice suits,
by publishing medical journals needed by its membership, and by making its conventions educational as well as political, the American Medical Association has offered its members and potential members a number of selective or noncollective benefits. It has offered its members benefits which, in contrast with the political achievements of the organization, can be withheld from nonmembers, and which accordingly provide an incentive for joining the organization.

The American Medical Association, then, obtains its membership partly because of subtle forms of coercion, and partly because it provides noncollective benefits. It would have neither the coercive power to exercise, nor the noncollective benefits to sell, if it were solely a lobbying organization. It follows that the impressive political power of the American Medical Association and the local groups that compose it is a by-product of the nonpolitical activities of organized medicine.

It is interesting to ask why no organization of college professors has acquired anything like the political power of the American Medi-


25. Garceau, p. 15.
27. Ibid., p. 16.
29. Ibid., p. 66.


26. Ibid., p. 99.
28. Ibid., p. 89.

cal Association. Probably the most important factor is that, in the academic profession, the learned societies are independent of the political association.30 If the American Association of University Professors could usurp the functions of the learned societies, it could rival the AMA. If subscriptions to the scholarly journals, and attendance at the conventions of the learned societies, were restricted to members of the AAUP, professors would probably be as well organized and as powerful as doctors. If the AAUP published as many technical journals as the American Medical Association, almost every faculty member would have an incentive to join, and the AAUP membership would presumably rise above its present level,31 and dues and participation could perhaps also increase,



