E. “EXCLUSIVE” AND “INCLUSIVE” GROUPS


The movement in and out of the group must no longer be ignored. This is an important matter; for industries or market groups differ

54. Some of the complexities of behavior in small groups are treated in Mancur Olson, Jr., and Richard Zeckhauser, "An Economic Theory of Alliances," Review of EconomicI and Statistia, XLVIII (August 1966), 266-279, and in "Collective Goods,
Comparative Advantage, and Alliance Efficiency," in Issues of Defense Economia (A Conference of the Universities-National Bureau-Committee for Economics Research), Roland McKean, ed., (New York: National Bureau of Economic Research, 1967),
pp. 25-48. [Footnote added in 1970.)

55. I am indebted to Alan Williams of York University in England, whose study of local government brought the importance of these sorts of spillovers among local govenments to my attention.

fundamentally from nonmarket groups in their attitudes toward movement in and out of the group. The firm in an industry wants to keep new firms from coming in to share the market and wants as many as possible of those firms already in the industry to leave the industry. It wants the group of firms in the industry to shrink until there is preferably only one firm in the group: its ideal is a monopoly. Thus the firms in a given market are competitors or rivals. In nonmarket groups or organizations seeking a collective good the opposite is true. Usually the larger the number available to share the benefits and costs the better. An increase in the size of the group does not bring competition to anyone, but may lead to lower costs for those already in the group. The truth of this view is evident from everyday observation. Whereas firms in a market lament any increase in competition, associations that supply collective goods in nonmarket situations almost always welcome new members. Indeed, such organizations sometimes attempt to make membership compulsory.

Why is there this difference between the market and nonmarket groups which previous sections of this chapter have shown to have striking similarities? If the businessman in the market, and the member of the lobbying organization, are alike in that each of them finds that the benefits of any effort made to achieve group goals would accrue mostly to other members of the group, then why are they so much different where entry and exit from the group are concerned? The answer is that in a market situation the "collective good"-the higher price-is such that if one firm sells more at that price, other firms must sell less, so that the benefit it provides is fixed in supply; but in nonmarket situations the benefit from a collective good is not fixed in supply. Only so many units of a product can be sold in any given market without driving down the price, but any number of people can join a lobbying organization without necessanly reducing the benefits for others.56 Usually in a market situation what one firm captures another firm cannot obtain; essentially in a nonmarket situation what one consumes another may also enjoy. If a firm in a market situation prospers, it becomes a more formidable rival; but if an individual in a nonmarket group prospers, he may

56. In a social club that gives members status because it is "exclusive," the collective good in question is like a supracompetitive price in a market, not like the normal nonmarket situation. If the top "400" were to become the top "4000," the benefits to the entrants would be offset by the losses of old members, who would have traded an exalted social connection for one that might be only respectable.

well then have an incentive to pay a larger share of the cost of the collective good.

Because of the fixed and thus limited amount of the benefit that can be derived from the "collective good"-the higher price-in the market situation, which leads the members of a market group to attempt to reduce the size of their group, this sort of collective good will here be called an "exclusive collective good." 117 Because the supply of collective goods in nonmarket situations, by contrast, automatically expands when the group expands, this sort of public good should be called an "inclusive collective good." 118

57. This usage of the idea of the collective good is, to be sure, in some respects over-broad, in that the collective-good concept is not needed to analyze market behavior; other theories are usually better for that purpose. But it is helpful in this particular context to treat a supracompetitivc price as a special type of collective good. It is a useful expositional technique for bringing out parallels and contrasts between market and nonmarket situations with respect to the relationships between individual interests and group-oriented action. I hope that in the following pages it will also offer some insight into organizations that have functions both inside and outside the market, and into the extent of bargaining in market and nonmarkct groups.

58. There arc some interesting parallels between my concepts of "exclusive" and "inclusive" collective goods and some recent work by other economists. There is, first, a relationship between these concepts and John Head's previously cited article on "Public Goods and Public Policy" (Public Finance, XVII, 197-219). I did not understand all of the implications of my discussion of inclusive and collective goods until I had read all of Head's article, As I now sec it, these concepts can be explained in terms of his distinction between the two defining characteristics of the traditional public good: infeasibility of exclusion and jointness of supply. My exclusive collective good is then a good such that, at least within some given group, exclusion is not feasible, but at the same time such that there is no jointness of supply whatever, so that the members of the group hope that others can be kept out of the group. My inclusive collective good is also such that exclusion is infeasible, at least within some given group, but it is however also characterized by at least some considerable degree of jointness in supply, and this accounts for the fact that additional members can enjoy the good with little or no reduction in the consumption of the old members. There is, second, a relationship between my inclusivc-cxclusivc distinction and a paper by James M. Buchanan entitled "An Economic Theory of Clubs" (mime.). Buchanan's paper assumes that exclusion is possible, but that a (severely limited) degree of jointness in supply exists, and shows that on these assumptions the optimal number of users of a given public good is normally finite, will vary from case to case, and may sometimes be quite small. Buchanan's approach and my own arc related in that both of us ask how the interests of a member of a group enjoying a collective good will be affected by increases or decreases in the number of people who consume the good. Both of us have been working on this problem independently, and until very recently in ignorance of each other's interest in this particular question. Buchanan generously suggests that I may have asked this question earlier than he did, but whereas I have barely touched upon the question merely to facilitate other parts of my general argument, he has developed an interesting and general model which shows the relevance of this question to a wide range of policy problems.


Whether a group behaves exclusively or inclusively, therefore, depends upon the nature of the objective the group seeks, not on any characteristics of the membership. Indeed, the same collection of firms or individuals might be an exclusive group in one context and an inclusive group in another. The firms in an industry would be an exclusive group when they sought a higher price in their industry by restricting output, but they would be an inclusive group, and would enlist all the support they could get, when they sought lower taxes, or a tariff, or any other change in government policy. The point that the exclusiveness or inclusiveness of a group depends on the objective at issue, rather than on any traits of the membership, is important, since many organizations operate both in the market to raise prices by restricting output, and also in the political and social systems to further other common interests. It might be interesting, if space permitted, to study such groups with the aid of the distinction between exclusive and inclusive collective goods. The logic of this distinction suggests that such groups would have ambivalent attitudes toward new entrants. And in fact they do. Labor unions, for example, sometimes advocate the "solidarity of the working class" and demand the closed shop, yet set up apprenticeship rules that limit new "working class" entrants into particular labor markets. Indeed, this ambivalence is a fundamental factor with which any adequate analysis of what unions seek to maximize must deal.1111 A further difference between inclusive and exclusive groups is evident when formally organized, or even informally coordinated,

59. There is some uncertainty about what unions maximize. It is sometimes thought that unions do not maximize wage rates, since higher wages reduce the quantity of labor demanded by the employer and thereby also union membership. This reduction in membership is in turn contrary to the institutional interests of the union and harmful to the power and prestige of the union leaders. Yet some unions, such as the United Mine Workers, have in fact raised wages to a point they conceded would reduce employment in their industry. One possible explanation is that unions seek inclusive collective goods from government, as well as higher wages in the market. In this nonmarket capacity each union has an interest in acquiring new members, outside its "own" industry or craft as well as inside it. Higher wages do not hinder the expansion of a union in other industries or skill categories. Indeed, the higher the wages a union wins in any given labor market the greater the prestige of its leaders and the greater its appeal to workers in other labor markets, thus facilitating the growth of union membership outside its original clientele. This is something a union may be happy to do because this will help it fulfill its political, lobbying function. Interestingly, the CIO, and the catch-all District 50 of the UMW, may possibly have allowed the influence of John L. Lewis and the UMW to expand at some times when union wage levels limited employment in coal mining. I am thankful to one of my former students, John Beard, for stimulating ideas on this point.

behavior is attempted. When there is organized or coordinated effort in an inclusive group, as many as can be persuaded to help will be included in that effort.60 Yet it will not (except in marginal cases, where the collective good is only just worth its cost) be essential that every individual in the group participate in the organization or agreement. In essence this is because the nonparticipant normally does not take the benefits of an inclusive good away from those who do cooperate. An inclusive collective good is by definition such that the benefit a noncooperator receives is not matched by corresponding losses to those who do cooperate.61

When a group seeks an exclusive collective good through an agreement or organization of the firms in the market-that is, if there is explicit or even tacit collusion in the market-the situation is much different. In such a case, though the hope is that the number of firms in the industry will be as small as possible, it is paradoxically almost always essential that there be 100 per cent participation of those who

60. Riker's interesting argument, in Tht: Theory of Political Coalitions, that there will be a tendency toward minimum winning coalitions in many political contexts, does not in any way weaken the conclusion here that inclusive groups try to increase their membership. Nor does it weaken any of the conclusions in this book, for Riker's argument is relevant only to zero-sum situations, and no such situations are analyzed in this book. Any group seeking an inclusive collective good would not be in a zero-sum situation, since the benefit by definition increases in amount as more join the group, and as more of the collective good is provided. Even groups seeking exclusive collective goods do not fit Riker's model, for though the amount that can be sold at any given price is fixed, the amount the price will be raised and thus the gain to the group are variable. It is unfortunate that Riker's otherwise stimulating and useful book considers some phenomena, like military alliances, for which his zero-sum assumption is most inappropriate. See William H. Riker, Tht: Theory of Political Coalitions (New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1962).
61. If the collective good were a "pure public good" in Samuelson's sense, the
benefit the noncooperator receives would not only not lead to a corresponding loss to those who did cooperate; it would not lead to any loss whatever for them. The pure-public-good assumption seems, however, to be unnecessarily stringent for present purposes. It would surely often be true that after some point, additional consumers of a collective good would, however slightly, reduce the amount available to others. The argument in the text therefore does not require that inclusive collective goods be pure public goods. When an inclusive collective good is not a pure public good, however, those in the group enjoying the good would not welcome additional members who failed to pay adequate dues. Dues would not be adequate unless they were at least equal in value to the reduction in the consumption of the old members entailed by the consumption of the new entrant. As long as any significant degree of "jointness in supply" remains, however, the gains to new entrants will exceed the dues payment needed to ensure that the old members will be adequately compensated for any curtailment in their own consumption, so the group will remain truly "inclusive."

remain in the group. In essence this is because even one nonparticipant can usually take all the benefits brought about by the action of the collusive firms for himself. Unless the costs of the nonparticipating firm rise too rapidly with increases in output,62 it can continually expand its output to take advantage of the higher price brought about by the collusive action until the collusive firms, if they foolishly continue to maintain the higher price, have reduced their output to zero, all for the benefit of the nonparticipating firm. The nonparticipating firm can deprive the collusive firms of all the benefits of their collusion because the benefit of any given supracompetitive price is fixed in amount; so whatever he takes the collusive firms lose. There is then an all-or-none quality about exclusive groups, in that there must often be either 100 per cent participation or else no collusion at all. This need for 100 per cent participation has the same effects in an industry that a constitutional provision that all decisions must be unanimous has in a voting system. Whenever unanimous participation is required, any single holdout has extraordinary bargaining power; he may be able to demand for himself most of the gain that would come from any group-oriented action.63 Moreover, any one in the group can attempt to be a holdout, and demand a greater share of the gain in return for his (indispensable) support. This incentive to holdouts makes any group-oriented action less likely than it would otherwise be. It also implies that each member has a great incentive to bargain; he may gain all by a good bargain, or lose all in a bad one. This means much more bargaining is likely in any situation where 100 per cent participation is required than when some smaller percentage can undertake group-oriented activity.
It follows that the relationship among individuals in inclusive and


62. If marginal costs rise very steeply, and accordingly no firm has an incentive to increase output greatly in response to the higher price, a single holdout need not be fatal to a collusive agreement. But a holdout will still be costly, for he will tend to gain more from the collusion than a firm that colludes, and whatever he gains the collusive firms lose.

63. On the implications of a unanimity requirement, see the important book by James M. Buchanan and Gordon Tullock, The Calculus of Consent: Logical Foundations of Constitutional Democracy (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1962), especially chap. viii, pp. 96-116. I believe that some complications in their useful and provocative study could be cleared up with the aid of some of the ideas developed in the present study; see for example my review of their book in the American Economic Review, LIi (December 1962), 1217-1218.

exclusive groups usually is quite different, whenever groups are so small one member's action has a perceptible effect on any other member, so that individual relationships matter. The firms in the exclusive group want as few others in the group as possible, and therefore each firm warily watches other firms for fear they will attempt to drive it out of the industry. Each firm must, before it takes any action, consider whether it will provoke a "price war" or "cut-throat competition." This means that each firm in an exclusive group must be sensitive to the other firms in the group, and consider the reactions they may have to any action of its own. At the same time, any group-oriented behavior in an exclusive group will usually require 100 per cent participation, so each firm in an industry is not only a rival of every other firm, but also an indispensable collaborator in any collusive action. Therefore, whenever any collusion, however tacit, is in question, each firm in the industry may consider bargaining or holding out for a larger share of the gains. The firm that can best guess what reaction other firms will have to each move of its own will have a considerable advantage in this bargaining. This fact, together with the desire of the firms in an industry to keep the number in that industry as small as possible, makes each of the firms in any industry with a small number of firms very anxious about the reactions other firms will have to any action it takes. In other words, both the desire to limit the size of the group, and the usual need for
100 per cent participation in any kind of collusion, increase the intensity and complexity of oligopolistic reactions. The conclusion that industries with small numbers of firms will be characterized by oligopolistic interaction with mutual dependence recognized is of course familiar to every economist.

It is not however generally understood that in inclusive groups, even small ones, on the other hand, bargaining or strategic interaction is evidently much less common and important. This is partly because there is no desire to eliminate anyone from the inclusive group. It is also partly because nothing like unanimous participation is normally required, so that individuals in the inclusive group are not so likely to try to be holdouts in order to get a larger share of the gain. This tends to reduce the amount of bargaining (and also makes group-oriented action more likely). Though the problem is extremely complex, and some of the tools needed to determine exactly how much bargaining there will be in a given situation do not now exist, it nonetheless seems very likely that there is much less strategic

interaction in inclusive groups, and that the hypothesis of independent behavior will frequently describe members of these groups reasonably well.



