7. ISIS: After the State Fails


It was easy to get excited about Tunisia. Despite deep ideological conflict, the democratic transition survived, flawed yet intact. In the Middle East, everything is relative. Revolutionaries have the luxury—and the burden—of judging their success against some imagined standard. But the rest of us have to situate Tunisia’s trajectory within a broader regional context. And with every passing day—as Iraq, Syria, Libya, and Yemen imploded—Tunisia looked all the better.

Yet in Tunisia there were darker undercurrents, if you knew where to look. We saw some of them in the previous chapter: Ideological divides hadn’t yet been resolved, only postponed. But there was something else, and it confounded analysts and activists alike. As the democratic transition sputtered along, a disproportionately large number of Tunisians were looking elsewhere for hope and inspiration. More than three thousand Tunisians found that inspiration on the battlefields of Syria, forming a shockingly high percentage of an estimated twenty-two thousand foreign fighters.1 According to the Tunisian interior ministry, as of April 2015, another 12,490 Tunisians had tried to leave to fight in Iraq, Syria, and Libya but had been blocked by the authorities.2

This was a different world, shrouded in silence and mystery, in the back alleys of an otherwise bustling capital city. One could spend days in Tunis and not see a single sign of it, except perhaps a fleeting mention or a muffled conversation. But if you were a young Tunisian, you almost certainly knew friends, acquaintances, and perhaps even family members who had gone to fight, or at least got stopped trying. For the average Westerner, the idea of knowing an Islamic State fighter—or knowing the brother, father, or sister of an Islamic State fighter—was the height of the exotic. For many young Tunisians, it was the new normal. It was just something that (some) people did. Friends and family of foreign fighters spoke matter-of-factly, sometimes nonchalantly, of what these young men had done. They might as well have been talking about a relative who had gone backpacking in Europe or to study in the United States. Then again, was there ever a “right” way to speak of someone you knew, and even loved, going to fight for a terrorist group?

* * *

I MET YASSINE in a quiet coffee shop in the Bardo neighborhood, near the Tunisian parliament. We found a seat tucked away in the corner. Like all coffee shops in Tunisia, the air was layered with smoke, billowing up to ceiling, creating a vaporous cloud above our heads. I have to admit that I was in somewhat new territory. I asked my friend and fixer Jihed: What was the appropriate thing to say to someone whose son had died fighting for the Islamic State in Syria? Yassine’s son, a student at Manouba University, had been killed in August 2013.

“It happened all at once,” Yassine recalled. The son, who I will call Hichem, began spending a lot of time at the mosque, and going to the fajr, or dawn, prayer. He grew a short beard and started wearing a thawb, the telltale dress of Salafis hoping to replicate the unadorned desert garb of seventh-century Arabia. “I told him this isn’t how we Tunisians dress, and he took it off. But he got a passport without telling us. He would tell his mother everything, except this one thing. One day, it was a Sunday, he didn’t come home. He called to say he was staying with a friend, although that’s not something he ever did.”3

Of course, Yassine told me, he was surprised. Clearly, their son was becoming more conservative. He was keeping to himself, spending a lot of time on the computer, but it never occurred to them that he might want to travel to Syria, first joining al-Qaeda affiliate Jabhat al-Nusra before moving on to the Islamic State.

It was this puzzle that intrigued me. How did a father, or anyone else for that matter, make sense of such a tragedy? In mourning and trying to make sense of it all, Yassine had a number of hypotheses, ranging from the lure of jihadist forums on the Internet to a Salafi preacher at the local mosque who “brainwashed” his son, inserting foreign ideas of takfir, or the excommunication of fellow Muslims. Any discussion of radicalizing factors lends itself to analytic confusion, particularly if you’re looking for an elegant model of why people turn to political violence and terrorism. Radicalization, as it happens in real life, is inelegant. It’s banal to say so, but different people radicalize in different ways. Why does one individual choose to join the Islamic State and not someone else in that same slum who experiences many of the same political and economic pressures? As terrorism scholar Jessica Stern writes, “It is difficult to make gross generalizations about what leads individuals to do what they do in any area of life; difficulty in answering this question is not unique to terrorism experts.”4 For some people, radicalization is a gradual process that takes place over many years—the product of accumulated experience. Others might be predisposed to radical politics, but it is only a catalyzing moment that pushes them not just to theorize or think about violence, but to act on it. Trying to understand why will always be something of a mystery, particularly for a grieving mother and father. This was their son.

In what would be a recurring theme, Yassine said that his son and other young Tunisians were initially attracted to Syria because of the unfolding humanitarian catastrophe. Watching the slaughter of their Syrian brethren at the hands of the Assad regime, they were moved to act. The groups that were most hospitable to foreign fighters tended to be the Islamist rebel factions, the most powerful of which was Jabhat al-Nusra. Far from the usual al-Qaeda franchise, Nusra, directing its fire against Assad and fighting alongside mainstream Free Syrian Army (FSA) factions, enjoyed considerable legitimacy among Islamist and non-Islamist Syrians alike. In April 2013, the leader of the Islamic State of Iraq (ISI), Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, in an attempt to wrest control of Nusra, announced a merger between the two organizations. Nusra rejected his entreaties, leading to a split that would have dramatic implications in the world of jihad.5 In the ensuing confusion, many Tunisian fighters, including Hichem, defected to the Islamic State after it changed its name to include “Sham,” the Arabic appellation for greater Syria.

Hichem’s views hardened. “In those final months, he was asking his mother to pray for him to join the ranks of the martyrs,” Yassine recalls. Young fighters, with no real military experience, went to Syria not knowing what to expect. Some became disillusioned. Others, like Hichem, appear to have radicalized over the course of the fighting, particularly after joining the Islamic State. This isn’t surprising. War and radicalization go hand in hand, which makes it all the more important to distinguish between the initial motivations for joining an Islamist rebel group and how those motivations and ideological commitments evolve over time. In other words, a young Tunisian might, at first, be moved to join Nusra for “secular” reasons—to fight Assad, out of a desire for revenge, because his friends joined, or because Nusra takes better care of fighters or has more advanced weapons than other rebel groups. Individuals are complex, so we should assume that their motivations are complex as well. This suggests that the decision to ally with one faction over another is based on some combination of all of the above factors. Of course, religion plays a role as well; if it didn’t, we would see secular Tunisians going to fight for, say, the Free Syrian Army. Meanwhile, Salafi-oriented Tunisians are more likely to see the Assad regime as a secular, infidel regime at war with pious Sunni Muslims. They are more likely to see jihad as a religious obligation. For them, it doesn’t matter that they are Tunisian and the people they’re ostensibly fighting for are Syrian; they are all Muslims, bound together as members of a transnational umma. Religion, then, is necessary, but it is not sufficient.

In one of the earliest studies of Syrian rebel motivations, drawing on interviews with over 300 fighters in 2013–14, Vera Mironova, Loubna Mrie, and Sam Whitt found that “many reasons given by Islamists for taking up arms are not that different from FSA fighters.” While 71 percent of Islamists cited the desire to build an Islamic state, only 25 percent said this was their main motivation. Interestingly, when they interviewed FSA fighters who defected to an Islamist group, “almost all mentioned reasons which were not expressly religious.”6

However, after spending a significant period of time with a particular Islamist faction, fighters are likely to adopt and internalize more and more of the group’s ideology. In other words, the “Islamism” of Islamist rebels is, to an extent, acquired. According to the study, 74 percent of Islamist respondents said they had become more religious since the beginning of the war. Daily immersion and indoctrination in a group’s propaganda is difficult to resist, particularly when it brings with it the prospect of belonging and brotherhood. As terrorism researcher Thomas Hegghammer, curator of the Bored Jihadi Tumblr page, notes, “Look inside jihadi groups and you’ll see bearded men with Kalashnikovs reciting poetry, discussing dreams, and weeping on a regular basis.”7 The natural desire to belong and be part of a cause that transcends the individual—something that grows increasingly appealing when facing death—contributes to a powerful and self-reinforcing dynamic. The most radical groups, such as the Islamic State and Jabhat al-Nusra, obviously take ideological coherence seriously. Accordingly, individual fighters, even those with reservations, have strong incentives to demonstrate ideological fervor in order to gain the favor of local and regional commanders. Fear also plays a role, particularly in the Islamic State, where openly expressing doubts about the organization can bring about an untimely death. With individual fighters demonstrating, or even overstating, their devotion to the cause, a kind of religious outbidding takes place, leading to a vicious cycle of radicalization.

While it may be more pronounced in the region, this cycle isn’t necessarily unique to civil conflict in the Arab world. Moderates tend to lose out in revolutions and civil wars (or wars of any kind). The longer a society experiences chaos and disorder, the stronger radicals become. As radicals grow stronger, violence intensifies, and so on. As Samuel Huntington writes in his classic 1969 work Political Order in Changing Societies, “The moderates remain moderate and are swept from power. Their failure stems precisely from their inability to deal with the problem of political mobilization. On the one hand, they lack the drive and ruthlessness to stop the mobilization of new groups into politics; on the other, they lack the radicalism to lead it.”8

Almost by definition, gradualism loses its appeal in the totalizing fog of battle. When the goal is to vanquish an opponent, or merely stay alive, everything else fades into the background. For the “moderate,” the taking up of arms is done grudgingly, if at all. The radicals, however, embrace violence because they have lost faith, if they ever had it, in the possibilities of politics. Revolution is the only way, and revolution is about maximalist aims. Why, exactly, would people who are willing to kill and die for a cause care about being moderate? In their book ISIS: Inside the Army of Terror, journalists Michael Weiss and Hassan Hassan identify an unlikely, even odd, category of Islamic State supporter: secularists or agnostics who “express deep objections about [the group’s] atrocities” but come to embrace violence as necessary.9


Democracy’s Costs

The hope has always been that democratization and political participation would offer disaffected citizens peaceful outlets to express economic and political grievances. This notion—that the only way to effectively undermine Middle East terrorism is to promote democratic openings—was the animating premise behind the second Bush administration’s Freedom Agenda in the 2000s. A growing body of evidence suggests that this is at least partly true in the long run. (Steven Brooke and I survey this literature in greater detail in an article we wrote in 2010.10) But Tunisia hadn’t, and wouldn’t, reach the long run anytime soon.

Democracy is no easy fix, and there tends to be a short-term trade-off. Democratizing countries may be more prone to instability, as the political scientists Edward Mansfield and Jack Snyder have persuasively argued in their work.11 This is particularly the case in countries where democratic openings deepen ideological cleavages. In postrevolutionary contexts such as Tunisia’s, extremist groups benefit from institutional and governance gaps. The fall of a dictator—and the euphoria of long-awaited regime change—raises expectations, yet institutions are too weak to meet rising popular demands.

In conversations with young Tunisians who have friends or relatives who went to fight in Syria, I would often point out that Tunisia, unlike its neighbors, was relatively democratic and provided channels for participation within the system. My claims were often met with skepticism and cries of “What democracy?” When I met with the Tunisian rapper DJ Costa in a run-down district of Manouba, I suggested it was something of a paradox that Tunisia, the Arab world’s democratic “model,” could produce so many foreign fighters. He scoffed:

You, because you live outside, you feel that it’s a contradiction, but we know that we don’t have democracy in Tunisia. It’s like a man whose skin is dirty. For months he hasn’t washed himself, and then, one day, he puts on nice, expensive clothes. But you know him, who he really is.12

DJ Costa’s brother, Youssef, had gone to fight in Syria but quickly became disillusioned by growing rebel infighting. He managed to return to Tunisia but discovered that there was no place for someone like him. After constant police harassment, he went back to Syria, where he was killed by an airstrike. “Even after he died, they’re still harassing our family,” Costa told me.

In the city of Kairouan, a Salafi stronghold, I unexpectedly met a young Tunisian filmmaker, whose cousin was, as of writing, still in Syria fighting with the Islamic State. “I am against his decision, but I respect it,” he told me, over a bottle of Tunisian beer and a seemingly unlimited supply of cigarettes.13 I asked him if he thought that going to fight for the Islamic State was normal. It seemed to me like a big deal. “You’re living in America, habibi, not in Tunisia,” he said. “But if you lived in Tunisia and you’re experiencing daily subjugation and injustice, and you have ideas, and you have principles, and you have objectives, and you have a vision for the future, and if you live in a state that doesn’t embrace you, then it’s the opposite. It’s very normal.” By the time we were winding down the conversation, he was on his fourth or fifth bottle. The seriousness of the conversation had given way to something lighter, if only because that was the easier way, maybe the only way to live with it. There were three of us at the table, and we all knew it. This was their reality, and what could they do but laugh at the absurdity? “Normal? What’s normal?” he asked me playfully. “A woman walks in the street wearing a bikini. Here, it’s not normal. In America, it’s normal.”

* * *

DEMOCRACY AS AN ABSTRACT concept was well and good, but for many Tunisians the democratic transition hadn’t translated into positive changes on the ground. The economy continued to struggle, and those on the fringes—secular revolutionaries and Salafi radicals alike—felt that the political process, moving slowly because of polarization and gridlock, stifled the kind of dramatic change that was necessary.

In a 2010 article, Middle East expert Marc Lynch wrote that “when organizationally robust, the Muslim Brotherhood is well-placed to act as a barrier to incursions by al-Qaeda.”14 Here, in Tunisia, a Brotherhood-inspired organization had risen to prominence and power, yet this doesn’t seem to have provided much of a bulwark against Salafi radicalization (of course, one could argue the counterfactual that if it wasn’t for Ennahda, the number of foreign fighters would be even higher). For many young, disaffected Tunisians, Ennahda didn’t seem to even register as a viable option. As Yassine told me, his son “wasn’t interested much in politics. He didn’t know the names of politicians.”

Early on in Tunisia’s democratic transition, Ghannouchi and other Ennahda leaders were optimistic that they could bring Salafis into the fold. Ghannouchi saw in the Salafis some of himself. “The Salafist youth reminds me of my youth,” Ghannouchi said in 2012.

This is a generation that was born with their fathers being absent and has grown up listening, like a litany, to stories of torture and suffering. The only references that unfortunately they found were religious channels from the Gulf, with a strong Salafi message. However, I am convinced that in ten to fifteen years Tunisia will be able to welcome back the Salafis just like it did with the Islamists of my generation who have been reconciled with moderate indigenous Islam. The ability of this country to tame the toughest plants is quite incredible!15

In retrospect, Ghannouchi’s sentiments seem rather naive. The outreach to Salafis not only failed on its own terms but also heightened secular fears that Ennahda and the Salafis were ultimately two sides of the same coin. Ghannouchi hoped to keep it in the family—in one controversial video he used “we” when speaking to a group of Salafis—but this, as it turns out, was a family hopelessly divided.16 History didn’t begin in 2011. Tunisia was the only country in the Arab world that experienced both forced secularization and brutal authoritarian rule, a particularly noxious combination. Under Ben Ali, the secret police would grow suspicious if they saw a house with the lights turned on every morning. This could only mean one thing—that someone was waking up early for the fajr prayer, a sign of particular piety. For decades, Tunisia had little space for open and overt expressions of religion, and this, no doubt, has had a distorting effect on the social fabric in ways that are difficult to measure. If we want to understand why Tunisia has a seemingly exceptional problem with young men fighting abroad, this unusual context—which no other country in the region shares—is at least part of the story.

It was this history that made any attempt at incorporating Salafis in the social and political mainstream a particularly challenging task, although that didn’t keep some from trying. In 2012, Ennahda, now a governing party for the first time in its history, pushed for the legalization of two Salafi parties, the Reform Front and Hizb ut-Tahrir. However, neither of these parties gained traction, with most Salafis opting to stay outside the democratic process. The outcome couldn’t have been more different in Egypt, where various Salafi parties entered electoral politics in full force, winning a remarkable 28 percent of the vote in 2012. In a country as conservative as Egypt, Salafi ideas had acquired mainstream respectability. After Egypt’s own revolution, which took place just weeks after Tunisia’s, the leading Salafi groups rightly judged that by participating, they could achieve tangible gains on their core demands. Injecting religion into every public debate, they succeeded in skewing the entire Egyptian political system rightward. On the crucial question of the constitution, they served as a sort of sharia lobby, dragging the Muslim Brotherhood further to the right in a kind of “tea-party effect.” Two of the most controversial clauses of the 2013 constitution (articles 4 and 219)—highlighting the role of Islamic law and empowering the religious establishment to play an advisory role on legislation—reflected the influence of the Salafi bloc.

In contrast, Salafis, given the secularized environment, weren’t well established in Tunisia before the revolution, and their numbers were far fewer. The Islamists of Ennahda might have won 41 percent of the seats in the 2011 elections, but that didn’t necessarily mean there would be much room for those further to their right. What could Tunisia’s Salafis really hope to accomplish by joining the give-and-take of electoral politics? Despite winning by a landslide, Ennahda, because of overwhelming secular opposition, wasn’t able to include a mere mention of the word “sharia” anywhere in the constitution. The kinds of things that Salafis wanted and believed in simply weren’t on the table. If anything, the example of Ennahda was a cautionary tale, of how political compromises could undermine the Islamic identity of Islamists. Ennahda was technically both a political party and a religious movement, but, as a governing party, political survival became the overriding imperative—at the expense of grassroots preaching and religious education. Without established Salafi networks that could channel the outpouring of religious sentiment in a constructive direction, Tunisian Salafism increasingly adopted the language of alienation and opposition, drawing strength from the forgotten suburbs of Tunis and impoverished cities like Kairouan. It wasn’t so much the government or its policies that were the problem; it was an entire structure of power that left them voiceless, in economic, political, as well as religious terms.

Like so many of its Islamist counterparts across the region, Ennahda’s successes highlighted its failures. It had succeeded in being and becoming a “normal” political party. That, by itself, was a kind of victory for a movement that wanted nothing more than to be accepted as part of the fabric of political life. But, for those of a more radical bent, being and becoming normal wasn’t nearly enough.

* * *

WHAT ORGANIZATIONS LIKE the Brotherhood could offer was organization, identity, and belonging. For some, accepting the Brotherhood’s moral embrace meant becoming a more committed, serious Muslim, which meant not just a better life, but a better afterlife as well. This was no small thing. The all-encompassing nature of the movement, offering education, politics, and charity, supplied meaning where society had become weak and atomized in the face of an all too powerful state. In this sense, the Brotherhood, as a model, was wildly successful. But some, particularly those of a more impatient disposition, were looking for something uncompromising and dramatic. This is where the many affiliates and descendants of the Brotherhood had come up short. With the exception of Turkey, they hadn’t managed to hold power for any significant period of time.

The basic project of mainstream Islamism, if it can be summed up in a sentence, was to reconcile premodern Islamic law with the modern nation-state. But in many ways—and perhaps the most important ways—the state got the better end of the deal. The very process of state building—and the state-centric international environment which facilitated that process—had an inherently secularizing effect, forcing Islamists to limit their ambitions. Working within the state meant accepting most of the basic premises of statehood, and these premises had a secularizing bias. The most obvious example was citizenship, the building block of the modern state. In the Ottoman Empire, membership in the polity was based on your religion, with Christians answering to local religious leaders and Jews to the local rabbi. After the fall of the Ottomans, to be a citizen was to become the citizen of a nation, irrespective of religion. It is difficult to overstate the implications of this shift in legal and political legitimacy. Take, for example, the issue of blasphemy. In the premodern era, blasphemy was considered an attack not just on religion but on the state as well, since the two were intertwined. Attacking the Prophet, questioning the Quran’s divine authorship, or even renouncing one’s Islam were treated as political rather than strictly theological acts, more or less equivalent to treason. Apostasy, in other words, was not primarily a matter of freedom of conscience or even of “religion,” at least as the word is commonly understood today. Public apostasy, in particular, or calling on others to deny Islam’s foundational tenets, was perceived as a threat to the basic legitimacy of the Islamic polity (yet another example of how separating between the “religious” and “secular” falls short when discussing the role of Islam and Islamic law in premodern societies).17

The question of citizenship wasn’t necessarily insurmountable for Islamists, but it did present some problems. If all citizens were to be “equal” in the eyes of the state, then that meant Christians, like their Muslim counterparts, should enjoy the same right to lead that state. But if the goal of Islamists was an Islamic state, then could a Christian really be expected to preside over the Islamization of the state and the implementation of Islamic law? Many in Egypt’s Muslim Brotherhood didn’t think so, stating in their 2007 political platform that non-Muslims, as well as women, could hold any government position except for head of state. This was the traditional Islamist position, but, in an era of growing awareness on democracy, gender equality, and minority rights, it sounded decidedly antiquated. (Brotherhood leaders backtracked by suggesting that they would not pursue a legal or constitutional ban on women or Christians seeking higher office. Rather, it was simply something that they themselves would not support; others were free to do as they chose.)

Mainstream Islamists had made a decision long ago to work slowly but surely toward the vague goal of an Islamic state. Gradualism was their method. Change began with the individual. The Muslim individual, once reformed and imbued with the original Islamic spirit, would give rise to the new Muslim family, and so on, until the sentiment rose—eventually—to the top. But to get there, they would have to accommodate themselves to the realities of state power. After all, they needed authoritarian regimes to allow them just enough space to spread their message and build their organizational structures.

In the Arab world’s only democracy, Tunisia, the results were mixed. Islamists survived and even prospered—but at the price of conceding their Islamism. Meanwhile, in a country like Turkey, despite the power and popularity of Erdogan and the AKP, there were clear limits to how far Islamism could go within an already secularized state and society, no matter how many elections Islamists won. The forced secularization of the past could be “corrected,” but it couldn’t be undone. Elsewhere, the story, at least for Islamists, was dire. Try as they might, Islamist parties found themselves excluded from politics or, worse, brutally repressed. After the Algerian military intervened against democratically elected Islamists in 1992, the debate over Islamist participation in democratic politics intensified, with little headway. The Arab Spring held out the promise that the dilemmas of Islamist participation would, finally, reach their resolution. But it wasn’t to be. Secular elites and old-regime elements would do whatever they could to marginalize Islamist movements or “eradicate” them altogether. Just as important, powerful regional actors that distrusted the Muslim Brotherhood’s transnational reach, such as Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates, were willing to spend unprecedented sums of money—in the tens of billions of dollars—to boost anti-Islamist forces. On the international level, the United States and the European Union, even if they opposed their outright repression, weren’t exactly comfortable with Islamists either.

Islamist movements, then, weren’t just fighting autocratic regimes at home; the entire regional and international order seemed aligned against them, making it all the more difficult to envision not only taking power but also holding it for any significant period of time. Even if Islamists were allowed to win elections, they would still have to contend with the inevitable opprobrium from the international community or, worse, the possibility of yet another coup. For movements already predisposed to conspiratorial thinking, the events of the Arab Spring confirmed their worst fears. The fact that Islamists were “allowed” to take power in Egypt and Tunisia before the subsequent reversals only deepened the wounds, culminating in the Rabaa massacre. It was one thing to be pushed out of power; it was quite another for the world to watch quietly while a Western-funded military killed more than eight hundred Islamist protesters in broad daylight.

Everywhere, and particularly here, Islamists saw double standards. One Brotherhood activist I spoke to was incensed about the reaction to the attacks on the French satirical magazine Charlie Hebdo in January 2015, which took the lives of twelve staff members. “Our blood is shed day and night and no one pays any attention,” she told me, her voice rising. “Our blood is licit, but theirs isn’t. Our blood is cheap and theirs isn’t.” She disagreed with the decision of the Brotherhood’s English-language Web site to condemn the Paris attacks. Like nearly all mainstream Islamists, she opposed the killings, but she wondered why Islamists needed to so publicly and loudly condemn the killings, when no one would do the same for them. “The world’s balance is off,” she said.18


The ISIS “Model”

Mainstream Islamists had quite a lot going for them. They eschewed revolution and direct confrontation with the state, which meant that joining Brotherhood-like groups was risky, but not nearly as risky as some of the other options. Perhaps more important, these movements took pride in their pragmatism (mawdu‘iyya) and their grasp of the domestic and international realities, however unsavory. One way of understanding Islamism is as an effort to apply Islam. This is what makes it both important and relevant. But this also makes it vulnerable to charges of impotence. Applied Islam must be able to move beyond the wages of self-improvement and spirituality. It needs to be pragmatic and practical, which raises the question of what happens when efforts to apply Islam in the realm of law and governance fail, and fail repeatedly?

The rise of the Islamic State, then, was a new kind of threat, fundamentally different from anything that had come before. Al-Qaeda had achieved some measure of limited popularity—or at least sympathy—during the sharp uptick of anti-Americanism in the mid-2000s, but its model was never, and never could be, a real threat to the Brotherhood’s method and model of political change. Al-Qaeda was proficient at staging terrorist attacks in the West and the Middle East alike, but it proved unable to carry its successes into governance. To be sure, it could point to territorial gains in the relatively lawless regions of Yemen, Iraq, and Somalia, but its flirtation with state building was just that. More important, al-Qaeda could attract support through spectacular terrorist attacks, but its governance model, to the extent it even had one, failed to wrest the attention of the world or the imaginations of tens of thousands of would-be fighters and fellow travelers.

In retrospect, this is somewhat surprising—and counterintuitive. Al-Qaeda, after all, was more attuned to the exigencies of government than the Islamic State ever was. In William McCants’s fascinating account of al-Qaeda’s evolution, based on captured private correspondence, senior al-Qaeda leaders often come across as calculating politicians. One of these “politicians” was Adil al-Abab, a senior religious figure in al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula (AQAP). Abab is occasionally prone to saying things like, “The largest problem that we face here is the lack of public services such as sewage and water, and we are trying to find solutions.”19 As McCants notes, one AQAP media campaign sounded like something out of a U.S. presidential primary, featuring an interviewer asking residents, “How is it working for you now?” (One man enthusiastically replies, “wonderfully!”20) In a 2012 letter to his counterpart in al-Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM), Nasir al-Wuhayshi, the head of AQAP in Yemen, counseled gradualism in implementing the hudud punishments. “You can’t beat people for drinking alcohol when they don’t even know the basics of how to pray,” he wrote.21

This sort of talk was not something Islamic State leaders would ever countenance. Their vision for implementing Islamic law was total and unforgiving, as those under their rule would quickly learn. Yet the Islamic State, for all of its reckless abandon and apocalyptic fantasies, did what al-Qaeda could have only dreamed of. For al-Qaeda, the idea of establishing a “caliphate” was an inspiration and an aspiration. For the Islamic State, it was something that had to be done, and as soon as possible. Waiting was for the weak. There were those in the Islamic State who, in Graeme Wood’s retelling, were readying for insurrection if the caliphate wasn’t announced posthaste. Like many others, the preacher Musa Cerantonio, an Australian convert and Islamic State supporter, believed that the criteria for establishing a caliphate had been met well before the official announcement of June 29, 2014.22 One of those criteria was fairly obvious: You had to capture (and hold) enough territory. After seizing Mosul in June 2014, the Islamic State controlled a swath of territory roughly the size of Hungary or the state of Indiana. The group’s takeover of Iraq’s second largest city led to a newfound sense of urgency for world leaders, and particularly President Obama, who had just five months before dismissed the Islamic State as a “jayvee” team.

Considering the rapidity of the Islamic State’s rise, the media sensationalism was understandable and perhaps even advisable (after all, underestimating the group hadn’t proved very effective). But the most interesting part of the story wasn’t so much the Islamic State’s studied effectiveness at capturing territory but, rather, what it did with that territory once captured.

Unlike most terrorist groups, the Islamic State had a distinctive interest in long-term governance and state building, an interest that was reflected in the group’s propaganda. One 2015 study found that around 45 percent of the Islamic State’s media outreach focused on building and sustaining the caliphate, with messaging on “traffic police, charity work, judicial systems, hospitals and agricultural projects.” As the study concluded, “Come to the Islamic State, is the message. There is fun here, and food, and services.”23 As Patrick Skinner of the Soufan Group commented, “They need women and children, they believe they have a state, they now need a future.”24 Of course, this is propaganda—something that we know the Islamic State is quite good at—but it does capture the group’s considerable ambition and how it viewed itself in the broader sweep of history.

* * *

SINCE ITS ABOLITION in 1924, there had never been a serious, sustained attempt to reestablish the caliphate. Now, the Islamic State—and its branches in Libya, the Egyptian Sinai, and Nigeria—could claim to have been the first. Its model of governance might have been terrifying in any number of ways, but it was a distinctive model nonetheless. The Islamic State, in stark contrast to the Brotherhood and other Islamist groups, had little interest in existing state structures. These, to them, were precisely the problem. Jihadist theoretician Abu Bakr Naji’s 2004 jeremiad The Management of Savagery—a key influence on the Islamic State and published, appropriately, on the Internet—includes a preface titled “The Order That Has Governed the World Since the Sykes-Picot Era.”25 The Islamic State, in rather ostentatious fashion, sought to subvert the First World War–era agreement between Britain and France that drew the boundaries of Iraq, Syria, Jordan, Lebanon, and Turkey following the demise of the Ottoman Empire. After taking Mosul in June 2014, the group posted images of a bulldozer quite literally erasing the border between Syria and Iraq. It went out of its way to create a new administrative province, Wilayat al-Furat, or Euphrates Province, which straddles the legal border between the two nations, encompassing the western Syrian town of Albukamal and the eastern Iraqi town of al-Qaim.26 Underscoring its supranational ambitions, the Islamic State has administered these two towns, one Syrian and one Iraqi, as a single entity.27

For Islamic State supporters, the last caliphate was the Ottoman caliphate, but the last model caliphate was that of the Prophet Mohamed’s righteously guided companions. However, that didn’t keep the Islamic State from viewing the Ottoman Empire’s portioning off into artificial states as the original sin of the modern era (when Naji refers to the “fall of the caliphate,” it isn’t always clear to which caliphate he’s referring). To the extent that modern states depend on some secular notion of citizenship and on legislative bodies that legislate other than God’s law, they are anathema to the Islamic State’s Salafi-jihadi ideology. In his treatise, Naji, unsurprisingly, accuses the Brotherhood and its ilk of trying to brainwash Muslim youth into accepting their “heretical,” “rotten,” and “secular” plan.28

The Islamic State also makes repeated reference to another period oft-cited as an Islamic golden age: the reign of Harun al-Rashid (763–809 AD) during the Abbasid caliphate, centered on the glories of Baghdad and immortalized in the-not-so-pious One Thousand and One Nights.29 In strictly theological terms, the Islamic State would have no doubt considered the Abbasids—who were patrons of Greek philosophy and enjoyed poetry about wine and illicit romance—to be heretics. But references to al-Rashid serve a clear tactical purpose by giving historical weight to the Islamic State’s ambitions toward Shia-majority Baghdad. As McCants writes, “It is al-Rashid’s power the jihadists remember, not his impieties.”30

* * *

SALAFI-JIHADIST GROUPS SOMETIMES refer to themselves as muwahiddun, or monotheists. Monotheism, in the Salafi imagination, is the belief that “all of God’s Attributes found in the sacred texts should be understood in a literal manner.”31 Accordingly, because God’s oneness, or tawhid, is all-encompassing and because it serves as the foundation of the Islamic creed, his domain cannot be subdivided. Taken to the extreme, if such unity exists in the spiritual realm, then it only made sense that it should be replicated in the temporal world, including when it came to law and governance. (In other words, if a democratically elected parliament passes a law by majority vote requiring that the state cut off the hands of thieves, it would still be a violation of tawhid and therefore grounds for excommunication, whether or not the resulting piece of legislation was sound.)

Although the Islamic State’s forerunners in al-Qaeda offered a vicious critique of the Brotherhood’s accommodation of the secular state, they fell well short of constructing a coherent alternative in its place. This is where the Islamic State filled the ideological and intellectual vacuum, offering a vision for what the new Islamic caliphate could actually mean in practice. Unlike the Brotherhood, which believed in accepting the existing state and “Islamizing” it—just as they might Islamize democracy, socialism, or capitalism—the Islamic State believed in building on top of an entirely different foundation. To achieve fidelity to the text, the logic went, one had to start from scratch, since whenever Islamism and the modern state attempted to reconcile, it was always at the expense of the former. This was a new and rather distinctive take on the applied Islam of the modern-day Islamist ideologues who came to see the nation-state as the engine of Islamization.

As we saw earlier, the tensions between the mundane requirements of governance and religious absolutism make for an uncomfortable mix. One would think that such tensions are magnified tenfold when it comes to a group, like the Islamic State, with unabashedly maximalist goals. Yet in superseding the nation-state and the regional architecture, the Islamic State, which has no state patrons, also managed to supersede the endless contortions of mainstream Islamism. In other words, the totalizing nature of the Islamic State is no mistake: It’s inherent to the model.

There is little to suggest that this is sustainable in the long run (although, as ever, it raises the question of how long the long run is). As McCants elegantly puts it, “The caliphate may require caution but the apocalypse requires abandon.”32 Can an individual—or, for that matter, an entire organization—be, at once, both cautious and in the throes of reckless abandon? This tension is further magnified when the Islamic State prioritizes mass-casualty operations abroad—such as the November 2015 Paris attacks—which risk provoking massive retaliatory responses that threaten its governance project. That this balancing act is ultimately unsustainable, however, does not mean that the Islamic State’s model cannot inspire a small but vociferous minority throughout the Muslim world. It has and it will. More than that, even if it were destroyed tomorrow morning, the Islamic State would still stand as one of the most successful and distinctly “Islamist” state-building projects of recent decades. This is no small feat, and to the extent that one wishes to sensationalize the group, it should probably be on these comparatively mundane grounds.

Before anything else, a state—or an organization that wishes to approximate the functions of a state—must be able to provide some modicum of law and order. For ideological maximalists, this initial step is essential. Without order, there cannot be law, and the Islamic State’s project, as we will see, is very much about law. The Islamic State’s biggest break was the collapse of governmental structures in both Syria and Iraq in the post–Arab Spring period. With the resulting political and power vacuum, extremist groups could come in and do what discredited governments couldn’t—provide Syrians and Iraqis with a degree of security, which is what they came to crave the most. A Syrian in, say, Raqqa—the Islamic State’s de facto capital—might detest the group’s ideology but still “support” the Islamic State because having some security, rather than none, is preferable.

Here, oddly enough, the Islamic State’s absolutism served it well. Terror and state building went hand in hand. After a country collapses and descends into a state of nature with warring factions and rampant criminal activity, any group that hopes to reconstitute order must assume a monopoly over the use of force. This means roundly defeating any pretenders to the throne and, in an already brutal war zone, requires yet more brutality, something that the Islamic State displayed in spades. What makes the group appear exotic to the Western eye is its revelry in savagery. If it was interested in governing, why alienate so many constituents? There is little doubt that the leaders of the Islamic State see savagery as religiously justified and even mandated, but such savagery also serves a number of organizational interests. Instilling terror in the hearts of your opponents undermines their morale, making them more likely to stand down, flee, or surrender on the battlefield. The Islamic State has diligently built up a frightening mythology of the world’s fiercest, most hardened fighters, fighters who fear nothing and welcome death. Beyond the battlefield, the ability and willingness to inflict terrible violence has a deterrent effect, raising the costs for anyone who so much as thinks of challenging the group on its own territory. In October 2014, for example, the Islamic State systematically executed more than 150 members of a single Iraqi tribe, the Albu Nimr, after conquering the village of Heet. Instead of burying or otherwise disposing of the bodies, it left their exposed bodies in a ditch—a message to any others in Iraq who might stand in their way.33

But there is another way to understand the brutality of the Islamic State, and it has little do with “religion” per se, something that Naji himself hinted at in his memorable line: “One who previously engaged in jihad knows that it is naught but violence, crudeness, terrorism, frightening (others), and massacring—I am talking about jihad and fighting, not about Islam and one should not confuse them.”34 Elsewhere in his treatise, Naji admits that savagery is regrettable and even tragic but that, because of the exceptional nature of modern conflict, it becomes a necessary evil. For example, he offers a justification for an act—one of the most heinous—that the Islamic State would go on to commit seven years after he himself was reportedly killed by an American drone strike in Pakistan, in 2008.35 “Even the Friend (Abu Bakr) and Ali b. Abi Talib (may God be pleased with them) burned (people) with fire, even though it is odious, because they knew the effect of rough violence in times of need,” Naji writes.36

As we saw earlier, the problem of theodicy involves trying to answer that most eternal—and fundamentally human—of questions: Why does God permit evil in the world? Atheists and agnostics tend to see the existence of evil, and God’s seeming indifference to it, as invalidating the very notion of the divine. Islamists, and particularly those of the Salafi-jihadi strain, see the existence of evil—in the form of the oppression of Muslims, the abolition of the caliphate(s), and the brutality of war—as part of a cosmic struggle. At this basic level, they, like anyone else, are making sense, in their own twisted way, of this most fundamental of dilemmas. If there is evil, then it must be fought. To the extent that there is humiliation—and the story of the modern Muslim world is very much a story of humiliation—then there will be those who seek to address and “resolve” that humiliation through an unwavering extremism. Here it is worth quoting at some length a fascinating essay by the author Ziya Meral. He writes:

While we were amusing ourselves with the myopic question of how religion leads to violence we have missed out on the main question: How does violence alter religion and religious believers? Exposure to violence and injustice, seeing no “why,” and looking for a “how” to survive, requires theological responses in their rawest form: What is wrong with this universe? What is right?37

Meral considers what might motivate a religiously unlearned European jihadist. For many would-be French, British, or Belgian fighters, the first question is not necessarily one of theology. In a May 2015 audio recording, Islamic State leader Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi highlights the realities of repression and displacement when calling on Muslims to make hijra (migration) to the caliphate. “We call upon you,” he says, “so that you leave the life of humiliation, disgrace, degradation, subordination, loss, emptiness, and poverty to a life of honor, respect, leadership, richness, and another matter that you love—victory from Allah and an imminent conquest.”38 The European jihadist’s point of departure, Meral writes, is a “moral reading of the universe through personal experience, and the finding that it is corrupt, chaotic, and unfair. That is why it was only after deciding to travel to Syria did two confused British gap-year-adventure jihadists order Qur’an for Dummies.” He concludes, “In other words, by the time theological discussion of when and how Muslims can engage in violent jihad occurs, the more important questions will have already been asked and answered. Jihad is the last theological question.”39

The brutality of Salafi-jihadists, then, is in part the product of an already brutal, senseless world. Even if these would-be holy warriors don’t live in failed states themselves, they see those states all around them. Because of the powerful notion of a worldwide Muslim umma, they come to feel that injustice as if it were their own. It is little accident, then, that Naji’s exhortations of savagery came in the context of an increasingly bloody civil war in Iraq and a growing sense of subjugation among Muslims, especially Sunnis, in the Arab world.

If you come to believe that the world offers nothing but darkness, then modern notions of restraint may sound nice, but they are of little use in a state of war. More than that, they are liabilities, and dangerous ones at that. In the Islamic State statement, “The Scout Doesn’t Lie to His People,” the group’s spokesman, Abu Mohamed al-Adnani, says, “You went out demonstrating peacefully in Iraq for one year, and we have told you then that tolerance is useless with the Rawafid [a derogatory term for Shiites], and pacifism doesn’t work with them.… Beware [of] laying arms down, because if you lay [them] down this time you will be slaves for the Rawafid.”40


How the Islamic State Governs

Once territory is captured, held, and consolidated, what comes next? History is replete with examples of extremist groups (and governments) that give no quarter and take apparent joy in the shedding of blood. The more challenging task is channeling and constraining the focused brutality of the battlefield into the charges of governing. In quick order, with the international community paying little attention, the Islamic State began setting up fairly intricate and well-developed institutional structures. These structures were relatively effective—in providing basic services, for example—but, more important, they reflected a frighteningly ambitious effort to rethink the nature of the state. The elaborate legal structures—oriented around interlocking sharia courts, binding fatwas, and detailed tax codes—suggested a serious effort to institutionalize and regularize the various aspects of a new rule-based order, in what Yale University’s Andrew March and Mara Revkin term “scrupulous legality.”41 In an important Foreign Affairs article on the Islamic State’s approach to law and governance, March and Revkin note that the Islamic State judiciary is divided into three different kinds of courts, including the Supreme Islamic Court and the Diwan al-Hisba, which deals with cases referred by the morality police.42

In Syria’s Aleppo province alone, the Islamic State’s religious bureaucracy was surprisingly extensive. By June 2014, the group could claim five courts; ten Diwan al-Hisba headquarters; eleven Dawa offices; ten police stations; five “Services Offices,” responsible for the distribution of water, electricity, bread, and other goods; and twenty-two “Sharia Institutes”—all with carefully delineated roles to serve a population the Islamic State claimed as 1.2 million people.43 The Diwan al-Hisba, for instance, is charged with “the promotion of virtue and the prevention of vice,” which includes “drying up the sources of evil.”44 The men of the Hisba, or morality police, are responsible for patrolling to ensure that shops are closed at prayer time, preventing fraud in markets, and breaking up drug dens and other “dens of corruption.”45 The Dawa office is responsible for proselytizing, religious education, and the publication of brochures educating the population on religious affairs.46 In one Islamic State promotional video, a smiling foreign fighter praises the efficiency of the sharia court system in Syria’s northwestern Idlib province, reveling in the “speed with which cases were settled” and noting that “with Allah’s help” crime rates had fallen.47 By imposing sharia, including the hudud laws, the Islamic State lowered rates of blasphemy, a “phenomenon that the people of the Levant had suffered from,” the video said.48

The Islamic State is, in many ways, the most brutal “state” in the Arab world. Its punishments are extreme and invasive, and some are nothing short of sadistic. Yet as one analysis of its public administration in the Syrian city of Manbij notes, the group’s brand of brutality is relatively consistent and predictable.49 Arab states might be less brutal—avoiding attention-grabbing punishments like stoning, beheadings, and crucifixions—but they tend to be more arbitrary in their adjudication of crimes. In a typical Arab autocracy, citizens rarely know where exactly the red lines are. The fear of not knowing is its own kind of terror. The meting out of punishments often depends on the whims of administrators and the political connections of the accused. There is little resembling the rule of law. Instead, autocrats rule by law, instrumentalizing the legal system for the purposes of marginalizing opponents and accumulating personal wealth. Of course, the Islamic State is not immune to such abuses, but independent accounts of Islamic State administration suggest a less arbitrary application of law. As the aforementioned article notes, punishment of crime “is consistent because Manbijis feel confident that if you just follow ISIS’s rules, then you will be ok. It is effective because few crimes go unpunished (reportedly). Of course, the arbitrariness of some crimes like sorcery or cursing religion and the difficulty of knowing the real rate of crime force us to take both of these claims with a grain of salt.”50

In their profiles of Islamic State members, Weiss and Hassan discuss the role of “pragmatists” in shoring up support for the group. One such pragmatist, a cleric by the name of Abu Jasim, seemed well aware of the Islamic State’s atrocities but had little interest in discussing them. “I see them leaving people alone if nobody messes with them,” he said.51

In a region where, for the most part, no real notion of citizenship exists, the Islamic State offered an opportunity for its partisans to play an active role—by engaging in jihad, by supporting the economy of the nascent state, or by responding to the caliph’s call for more doctors and engineers. For a Salafi-jihadi who’s willing to lead a dangerous and rather austere life, it is a chance to join in building a different kind of state in the heart of the Arab world. For others who might otherwise take issue with the Islamic State and what it stands for, a limited social contract is still on offer. If you’re a Sunni Muslim and agree to abide by its rules, the Islamic State will offer various social services and limited legal protections. The group will prosecute thieves (brutally), ensure markets are running fairly, and provide universal education—albeit an extremely strict one.

The Islamic State is more than comfortable co-opting existing institutions in order to maintain the provision of critical services. As Mara Revkin notes, “When ISIS takes over a new area, they allow doctors and medical service providers to keep their jobs, as long as they are willing to provide healthcare to ISIS combatants.”52 The group’s ultimate interest, however, is in establishing new institutions, which allows it to become more self-sufficient and to signal its commitment to long-term state building. In its de facto capital of Raqqa, for example, the Islamic State’s health department opened a new medical college, issuing a call for applications to high school graduates.53

This isn’t exactly a welfare state, but, by the dastardly standards of the region, it’s more than what’s on offer in parts of Iraq, Syria, Yemen, and Libya. In this respect, the ruling bargain is rather elaborate for a protostate which has only really existed since 2013. As Revkin writes, “The ISIS social contract guarantees a limited number of legally enforceable rights—for example, the right to file complaints or charges against ISIS combatants or officials—in addition to welfare services, public institutions, and police protection. In exchange for these benefits, subjects are expected to pay taxes to the state treasury (bayt al-māl) and comply with the many other rules of residence in the Caliphate.”54

The Islamic State’s social contract is steeped in a distinctive legal architecture. The Islamic State muftis issuing legal codes recognize, even if implicitly, that the Quran does not contain enough minutiae to govern a state. Accordingly, the Islamic State accepts and even embraces the long-standing doctrine of siyasa shari‘iya, or discretionary law, whereby authorities are empowered to make “lawlike decisions as long as those decisions are issued solely with the welfare (maslaha) of the Muslim community in mind.”55 This requires some degree of improvisation. The Islamic State’s economic policy tackles governance issues the Prophet Mohamed likely never faced. For example, how should counterfeit goods be priced? To address this, an Islamic State mufti first cites the hadith “whoever deceives us, is not one of us” before diving into trademark law, arguing that counterfeiting constitutes “fraud against the buyer.” In Islamic State markets, therefore, shopkeepers must price counterfeit goods lower than authentic ones, and they must clearly indicate, next to the counterfeited trademark and in the same font, that the good is an imitation.56 Seventh-century Medina was probably not dealing with an influx of fake shoes. But the Islamic State says it could have.

With this in mind, it becomes somewhat easier to understand how some people—in a region that has long lacked any real sense of law, order, good governance, or citizenship—can support, or at least remain neutral toward, Islamic State rule.57 In Iraq, the Sunni population found itself increasingly marginalized (or worse). In Syria, civilians suffered unspeakable atrocities under a brutal dictatorship. With such a low bar, Islamic State rule could, and often did, seem like an improvement. A year into the group’s rule of the city, one Mosul resident told the Wall Street Journal, “I have not in 30 years seen Mosul this clean, its streets and markets this orderly.”58 The problem here, however, is that judging Islamic State governance is far from straightforward. Iraqis’ and Syrians’ perceptions of the quality of governance depend on their baseline of comparison, and that baseline changes over time. If those like the man in Mosul initially see the Islamic State as an improvement over, say, the Shia-dominated Iraqi government, these higher expectations soon become “normalized,” as Revkin notes.59 If governance quality subsequently deteriorates—and even if it doesn’t—residents are no longer comparing their state of affairs to what it was like under the Iraqi government, but rather what it was more recently like under the Islamic State.

In addition to governing, any state must maintain some kind of posture toward the outside world, even if it is a state that no country in the world recognizes. The Islamic State has advanced a “theory” of international relations that, to the outside observer, seems mindlessly extreme. But here, too, there was a strategy at work. Historically, Islamic law made distinctions between dar al-islam, the abode of Islam, and dar al-harb, the abode of war. As the legal scholar Mohammad Fadel explains, the Islamic State drastically departs from historic Islamic jurisprudence by arguing that, with the declaration of the caliphate, the Islamic State is the only Islamic state.60 Therefore, everyone living outside of its territory is in dar al-harb. This departure is unprecedented. But everything that then flows from that heterodox premise is by the book.

In the October 2014 issue of Dabiq, the Islamic State’s glossy English-language magazine, an article titled “The Fading Grayzone” reiterates this redefinition of dar al-islam. “The world has split into two encampments,” it reads, “one for the people of the faith, the other for the people of kufr [unbelief], in preparation for the final malhamah [epic].”61 By defining its Muslim opponents as apostates, the Islamic State can subject them to seemingly limitless savagery. This, for example, is how the group believes it is permissible to burn a Jordanian fighter pilot alive.

The Islamic State uses the distinction between the abodes of Islam and war to aid recruitment, arguing that it is incumbent upon Muslims to migrate to Islamic State–held territory. In his May 2015 speech, Baghdadi declared: “There is no excuse for any Muslim who is capable of performing hijra to the Islamic State, or capable of carrying a weapon where he is, for Allah (the Blessed and Exalted) has commanded him with hijra and jihad, and has made fighting obligatory upon him.”62

There are, of course, different rules and regulations for Christians living under Islamic State rule. But it is not correct to say the Islamic State simply makes them up or “uses” Islam to legitimize the naked thirst for power and dominion. As is often the case with madness, there is a method. In chapter 2, we saw how Muslims have more resources available to them when it comes to applying Islam to governance. Nowhere is the Islamic State’s (selective) reading of these resources more evident than in its policies toward Christians, which the group has formulated by reimagining a seventh-century document that Omar, Islam’s third caliph, had supposedly requested from the newly conquered Christians of greater Syria. In May 2014, the Islamic State issued a similar document laying out thirteen rules and conditions for Christians in Raqqa—but with a few revisions. In his analysis of the document, Andrew March notes that alongside “ostentatious displays of textual literalism,” the group also tacks on some new demands that help it govern and keep its tight grip on the city, including demanding that Christians “report and hand over anyone conspiring against the Islamic State” and that Christians observe the same standards of “modesty in their dress” as Muslim subjects.63

With a reputation for unprecedented savagery, the Islamic State could roll into Raqqa and extort every Christian in the city, without reintroducing any seventh-century scripture. It doesn’t. To its recruits and partisans, this is precisely the appeal.

Whether it is governing or waging war, the Islamic State is almost always self-consciously legalistic, drawing on sources and prophetic sayings from the early centuries of Islam, from later scholars like the controversial iconoclast Ibn Taymiyyah, as well as from modern scholars associated with the ultraconservative Wahhabi doctrine of Saudi Arabia. As Graeme Wood notes, “ISIS’s meticulous use of language, and its almost pedantic adherence to its own interpretation of Islamic law, have made it a strange enemy, fierce and unyielding but also scholarly and predictable.”64 This is not to say that the group is “Islamic”—whatever that might mean—but rather that it thinks it’s Islamic and takes its own approach to scripture quite seriously.65 Much analysis of the Islamic State’s rise concentrates on its considerable income and resources: its advanced weaponry (some of it U.S.-made), its oil production,66 and its profit from antiquities smuggling.67 A focus on material factors and dollar figures, however, falls well short of accounting for how and why the Islamic State is both so different and so dangerous. The group is certainly a profitable enterprise. But what distinguishes the Islamic State from any other militia in Syria or Iraq is its idiosyncratic vision of law, governance, and statehood.

In one of the earliest takes on the long-term import of the the Islamic State “model,” journalist Thanassis Cambanis writes that “today, there is not a single alternative vision of citizenship being offered in the region, not even a bad one. Groups like ISIS, or for that matter Hezbollah—which in all other matters is its polar opposite—thrive because they have an idea of what a citizen should do and be.”68 One might call this “bad citizenship.”

To be sure, while Cambanis’s basic point still applies, the appeal of the Islamic State’s ruling bargain has unsurprisingly diminished over time. The group has asked more and more from its subjects in exchange for the same or less than before. International efforts to dry up Islamic State funding sources along with the costs of endless war have imposed considerable strain on the group. Like many regimes in crisis, the Islamic State has opted to raise taxes and impose heavier fines. The temptation to overcompensate for losses at home with attacks on foreign targets exacerbates tensions within a group like the Islamic State that wants to be a state but still behaves like a nonstate actor when it comes to terrorist activity abroad. As Revkin puts it: “If ISIS begins to divert substantial resources away from governance in order to finance high-profile terrorist attacks and respond to the foreign interventions that such operations will likely provoke, civilians living under ISIS rule can expect their taxes and service fees to rise even more.”69

Eroding support for the group’s governance “model,” however, can only offer limited solace. Regardless of what happens to the Islamic State or its successors in the coming years (and decades), the damage cannot be undone. The Islamic State set a new standard for extremist groups, demonstrating that capturing and holding large swathes of territory is possible and that it can be achieved without the benefit of widespread popular support. This, in addition to the terror and barbarism, is what the Islamic State means. And what the Islamic State means is ultimately more important than what the organization is or what it does. The Islamic State succeeded in establishing a recognizably religious state—something that nearly every mainstream Islamist group before it had failed to do. Moreover, its image of a caliphate, however much it distorted the spirit and intent of Islam, aroused the imagination of a small but significant number of Muslims. Where the caliphate had for decades been a mere idea, it had now been established. If politics—even for extremists—is the art of the possible, then the caliphate, or a caliphate, had now, for the first time since 1924, become something beyond imagined. It was real. Even those who opposed it would have no choice but to contend with its legacy.

* * *

AS WE SAW IN previous chapters, the half solutions of the Muslim Brotherhood had built-in limits. The Brotherhood and its fellow travelers hoped to accommodate Islam and Islamic law within the modern nation-state, accepting many if not most of the state’s basic assumptions. Their predecessors were called Islamic modernists for a reason after all. Brotherhood-inspired organizations are, with few exceptions, at pains to minimize gaps between premodern Islamic law and modern international norms. Groups like the Brotherhood in Egypt, Tunisia’s Ennahda, and Morocco’s Justice and Development Party have all grown comfortable using terms like “civil state,” “popular sovereignty,” “women’s rights,” and “citizenship.” This doesn’t mean they are liberals—there is, after all, quite a gap between believing in women’s rights and gender equality—but they are keen to be recognized as legitimate and “normal” actors in the international system. Some Islamist parties, like Ennahda, are somewhat over-the-top in their presentation, deemphasizing their Islamism and adopting the language of liberalism and universal human rights in an effort to reassure skeptics at home as well as policy elites in the United States and Europe.

Since mainstream Islamists are, generally speaking, better at politics than theology, the exigencies of politics will almost always take precedence (to be justified religiously ex post facto). Being the pragmatists that they are, they believed—though that belief is now wavering—that Islamization could be achieved by working within the Westphalian order and respecting basic international red lines. (For example, as thoroughly Islamist as they are, it’s very difficult to imagine the Egyptian Brotherhood executing people for apostasy even if they could vote it into law through a majority vote in parliament.)

The model of the Islamic State is to ignore, dismiss, or supersede all such considerations entirely. Not only that, the group revels in its disregard for modern norms. As Andrew March notes, “Salafi-jihadis of the ISIS stamp eagerly embrace especially those practices that can be attributed to the Prophet and the earliest Muslims that offend modern sensibilities.”70 In this sense, the Islamic State—like all Islamist groups that must pick and choose from a vast corpus of Islamic law—are cherry pickers, even when their cherry-picking aspires to some degree of internal consistency. (There are also, it turns out, a lot of cherries).

There are few things more modern than the ostentatious and mannered antimodernism of modern-day fundamentalists. They cannot be who they are without drawing clear, unmistakable contrasts to who they aren’t. If a group like the Islamic State existed in the seventh or eight centuries, many of their offensive acts—such as requiring Christians to pay a special tax—wouldn’t be nearly as offensive as they are today. It is difficult to imagine a world where mass violence and the seemingly casual violation of the human rights of entire groups of people were accepted and “normal,” but this is precisely the way it was for millennia. As Fadel argues:

In enslaving non-Muslims, and executing and immolating captured Muslims and non-Muslims, the Islamic State claims to be applying the norms followed by the early Muslim community in its wars in the 7th century; but even granting that the early Muslim communities did enslave some of its captives and execute others, their practice at that time was in accord with prevailing customary standards of war that applied to both sides in any conflict, and thus are more accurately understood to be reflections of the customary law of war in the 7th century than a reflection of the permanent Islamic rules of warfare.71

In other words, some of what the Prophet Mohamed and his companions did fourteen centuries ago would of course offend modern sensibilities, because they were operating not according to modern standards but the standards of their own time and place. To expect anything else would be absurd. (A more relatable example might be the American founding fathers, who are revered by Americans even though the things they said, did, and believed more than two centuries ago—when it came to slavery and women’s rights, for example—would be considered bigoted and extremist by today’s standards.) To the extent that any faith tradition is universal and applicable to all times, it must evolve with a mind to the norms and customs of the particular local context at any particular time.

Such considerations are relevant to the endless, and often detached, debate about whether Islam is “violent.” Mohamed was a state builder, and state building has historically been a violent process, requiring, before anything else, the capture and control of territory. Naturally, then, the Quran had to have verses addressing and even endorsing the use of force. How could it be otherwise? The vast majority of Islamic scholars acknowledge, however, that the verses dealing with violence and the use of force were tied to a particular set of circumstances, and it was the task of clerics to consider when war was or wasn’t justified and how it should be waged. This is the jurisprudence of jihad.72 Yet the Islamic State has little interest—with the exception of the aforementioned Ibn Taymiyyah and a handful of other clerics—in the remarkable and varied development of Islamic law that occurred over the course of the intervening 1,200 years. As Salafis, they don’t consider themselves bound by centuries of classical tradition. Tradition, we should remember, is a fundamentally conservative force. Without it, almost anything is possible. Like Protestant radicals once did, the Islamic State and its ilk wish to go back to the source and to rid the source of the corruptions of “context.”73

* * *

AT THE HEART OF debates over the future of Islamism, in general, and the future of the Islamic State, in particular, are a set of endlessly intriguing questions about what we, as human beings, really want and what we really crave. In 1940, before the severity of Adolf Hitler’s crimes had become apparent, George Orwell reviewed Hitler’s Mein Kampf. He captured what to many of us today seems unfathomable: that Hitler came to understand something deep, unsettling, and ultimately terrifying about human nature. In the parlance of Islamists, he understood a powerful element of the fitra—the innate character, or instinct, of men. Orwell wrote:

[Hitler] has grasped the falsity of the hedonistic attitude to life. Nearly all western thought since the last war, certainly all “progressive” thought, has assumed tacitly that human beings desire nothing beyond ease, security, and avoidance of pain.… The Socialist who finds his children playing with soldiers is usually upset, but he is never able to think of a substitute for the tin soldiers; tin pacifists somehow won’t do. Hitler, because in his own joyless mind he feels it with exceptional strength, knows that human beings don’t only want comfort, safety, short working-hours, hygiene, birth-control and, in general, common sense; they also, at least intermittently, want struggle and self-sacrifice, not to mention drums, flag and loyalty-parades. However they may be as economic theories, Fascism and Nazism are psychologically far sounder than any hedonistic conception of life.… Whereas Socialism, and even capitalism in a grudging way, have said to people “I offer you a good time,” Hitler has said to them “I offer you struggle, danger and death,” and as a result a whole nation flings itself at his feet.74

I will always struggle to understand this, whatever this is. Although I believe in certain things, and believe in them passionately, I have never longed to join an army, militia, or rebel force. More than twenty thousand foreigners from outside Syria have flowed into the country, to fight for a cause they clearly believe in. The Islamic State revels in death. Alongside news of its imposition of sharia law and its military victories on the field, the Islamic State’s public relations team publishes celebratory photos of its own soldiers: young men, bloodied, slumped over their weaponry, dead. I sincerely hope that the desire to kill, destroy, and die for something greater than ourselves dissipates. But I am well aware that, although those desires can be mitigated, constrained, and channeled more constructively, they won’t—and cannot—disappear.

Mainstream Islamism will invariably be more compelling to more people than the Islamic State ever will. The Brotherhood and its many affiliates and descendants throughout the region, though they are now struggling to various degrees, are and will continue to be mass movements, with members numbering in the hundreds of thousands and supporters and sympathizers in the millions. But if the Islamic State has proved anything, it is that a relatively small number of ideologically committed individuals can have an outsized effect on the regional and international order and perhaps even the course of history. However, for groups like the Islamic State to persist and succeed, they need a conducive environment. As much, then, as religion and ideology matter—and there should be no doubt by now that the Islamic State takes its own version of Islam quite seriously—ideas, by themselves, are not enough. The Islamic State itself was perhaps inevitable, but its rise to prominence was not. It has benefitted considerably from the manifest failures of Arab governance, of an outdated regional order, and of an international community that was unwilling to act as Syria descended into savage repression and civil war. In war zones, religious absolutism offers certainty where no certainty exists. This, too, is one of the great tragedies of the Arab Spring and its bloody aftermath.





