3. Islam’s Reformation

The church came to accept democracy and, to an extent, liberalism, but these were concessions from a position of weakness rather than strength. The various strains of Catholic conservatism were ill suited for a rapidly changing Europe, where ideas like egalitarianism, mass politics, and universal suffrage were becoming ubiquitous. Meanwhile, Protestantism claimed to depend on a sole scripture (sola scriptura), which was ultimately unable to provide a workable foundation for a distinctly Christian conception of law and governance.

Within Islam, the idea of a return to scripture—which had inspired Luther centuries before—was more practicable. The Quran, in a way that the Bible never was and never could be, was unimpeachable in the eyes of believing Muslims. The fundamentals, then, were stronger, and where the fundamentals were stronger, “fundamentalism” had more of a fighting chance.

But fundamentalism, or what would later become known as Islamic revivalism or Islamism, had another unlikely advantage: Islam, oddly enough, happened to be the most flexible and modern of the Abrahamic religions. Not only that, Islamic law, or sharia, proved more “secular” than Christian conceptions of law and politics. This is a critical point of departure, since it is the sharia’s very secularity that makes it more relevant and resonant in today’s politics. How, though, could this be? This unlikely reality can help us solve the puzzle of Islam’s continued relevance in a secular age.

It is not so much that premodern Islamic law was a bad fit for modernity; it is rather that, almost by definition, any premodern legal system—being based on an entirely different set of assumptions—was bound to be inappropriate and irrelevant to modern realities and expectations. In short, Islam had to change, and the story of how it came to change and, importantly, why it was able to change is the subject of this chapter. As we will see, where official Christianity came into conflict with mass politics, pluralism, and democracy—a conflict it ultimately lost—Islam was able to accommodate and even incorporate these supposedly Western secular ideas, recasting them as authentic and “Islamic.”

* * *

TO GRASP THE IMPORT of the debate that would soon rage—over the problem of modernity and what to do about it—we first need to understand the massive geopolitical shift that took place in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. The Ottoman caliphate, deemed the “sick man of Europe,” was entering a slow but unmistakable decline. The territories that were ostensibly part of the empire were coming under the effective control of colonial powers, which brought with them new notions of European nationalism. Russian and Austrian campaigns gradually eroded Ottoman territory in the predominantly Christian areas of the empire. Bosnia and Herzegovina—where neither European policies nor Ottoman reforms were able to quell restive Christian and Muslim populations—saw uprisings in the late nineteenth century and soon fell out of Ottoman control.1 Meanwhile, colonialist encroachments on Muslim territories continued with French attempts to seize control of Egypt and the Levant.

These setbacks prompted the tanzimat reforms in the nineteenth century, the empire’s final, desperate attempt at modernizing the caliphate’s ailing structures. The tanzimat were the Ottoman response to the nationalist ideologies that were gaining momentum in imperial territories. The reforms sought to offer a more inclusive Ottoman “nationality” that would counter the appeal of new national identities, say in Lebanon or Egypt, by easing discriminatory policies toward religious and ethnic minorities. The tanzimat ushered in wide-ranging changes in the Ottoman military, political, and economic bureaucracy, but it was too little, too late.

The religious innovations of the Islamic modernists would have been impossible to understand outside this particular political context. Theirs was a modern response to modern problems. When they looked around themselves at the turn of the century, religious thinkers like Jamal al-Din al-Afghani and Mohamed Abduh saw the success of the colonial project on the one hand and the many, varied Muslim failures on the other. Profoundly troubled, they asked—and then tried to answer—the question of what could be done. If Muslims were now weak, how could they once again become strong, just as they had been in centuries prior?

For centuries, Muslim thinkers had looked down on Christian Europe, taking refuge in the uninterrupted success and dominance of Islamic empires. This posture of knowing superiority became untenable as Europe closed the gap, soon enough eclipsing the Muslim world altogether. Certainty was replaced by insecurity and resentment. Simon Wood remarks that the writings of the influential modernist Rashid Rida reflect “an overwhelming awareness of Muslim weakness relative to non-Muslim strength. The calm confidence of classical Islam is lacking.”2 Rida, the prolific editor of the influential journal al-Manar, was born in Ottoman Syria in 1865. It is interesting to note these Levantine origins, since, in the various accounts of his life, Rida seems almost rootless. He traveled throughout the Muslim world with apparent ease. That he wasn’t Egyptian mattered little in what would become his adopted home. The nation-state was slowly asserting its dominance, but Rida was among the last of a generation that could be—and not just aspire to be—pan-Arab and pan-Islamic.

Rida migrated to Cairo in 1897 to study under the Egyptian jurist and al-Azhar scholar Mohamed Abduh.3 Rida and al-Manar served as the intellectual bridge between Afghani and Abduh’s Islamic modernism and later movements like the Muslim Brotherhood. The Egypt to which Rida migrated, despite nominally remaining part of the Ottoman realm, had by 1882 succumbed to the effective control of the British Empire. In the 1880s, Rida’s mentor and teacher Abduh, along with Afghani, founded a society with a strong anti-British bent, called al-Urwa al-Wuthqa, or the Indissoluble Bond. The name they chose was no accident.

Europeans were able to subjugate Muslims because Muslims were weak, and Muslims were weak because they had abandoned the true, original Islam. It was this conclusion that reflected the essential premise behind all revivalist movements, from the modernist to the most literalist. Naturally, the next question was why, exactly, had Muslims strayed from the straight path?

The tragedy of Muslim paralysis in the face of an overwhelming cultural and political assault wasn’t just a problem for Islamists, but for so-called secularists as well. Secularists, though, had a different interpretation of the Muslim world’s fall from grace. Their solution was not only to appropriate the scientific and technological progress of Europe, its work ethic, or the trappings of parliamentary politics but also to go further and embrace elements of European culture, including at least some separation of religion from politics. Religion, in their view, could no longer remain at the center of public life. These being conservative societies, secularists rarely called for a wholesale separation, but they hoped to shift their societies toward less, rather than more, religious politics.

As this chapter will show, the claim that Muslims rejected modernity fundamentally misinterprets this critical phase in the Middle East’s evolution. If anything, nearly everyone across the ideological spectrum was grappling with modernity and all that it entailed. Some, to be sure, didn’t like what they saw, but they were irrevocably changed by it nonetheless. Meanwhile, those “traditionalists” who still held to premodern approaches to law were overtaken by events, either unable or unwilling to mount their own challenge. Many if not most traditionalists, including large segments of the clerical class, were co-opted by the state, accepting their fate—and reduced influence—with little resistance.


One Man’s Reformer Is Another Man’s Fundamentalist

The Islamic modernists were the original Salafis—a group usually today associated with ultraconservative literalism, theocratic rule, and religious violence. But for these first “Salafis,” the basic thrust was quite different. First, they hoped to return to the unadulterated Islam of al-Salaf al-Salih, or the early, righteous generations of Muslims who were closest, in both time and proximity, to the Prophet Mohamed. This, though, did not necessarily suggest an obsession with the past. After all, as Jonathan Brown notes, the Islamic modernists believed that “Islam had always been modern … and it had to be returned to its proper form.”4 For them, the purity and purification of Islam meant moving away from bland imitation and literalism, not toward it. As the memory of the Prophet faded, Islam became ossified, buried under layers after layer of highly technical Quranic and legal commentaries. Scholars wrote commentaries about other commentaries. This was the work of self-indulgent elites who had lost sight of the essence of religion and what it could offer to the hearts—and minds—of men. Something had gone wrong “in between,” and only by reconnecting to the Quran as the source could the spirit of Islam be revived. For someone like Rashid Rida, the abandonment of the Quran was an “ugly abandonment.”5

The modernists looked at the passivity of the traditional religious establishment with dismay and even disgust. It wasn’t that the clerics had rejected modernity as much as it was that they were simply indifferent to it, and in some ways indifference deserved less respect. They had little to say about a world that was changing so rapidly around them. Stuck in their books and their circular legal commentaries, the clerics could not muster anything resembling a coherent response to the twin challenges of colonialism and secularism. The implications of their weakness were far-reaching. The traditionalists, with old, outmoded modes of thinking, had left Islam—and Muslims—vulnerable to external conquest.

Losing territory was one thing but losing faith quite another. Rida and his contemporaries were alarmed by the influx of Christian missionaries. They feared that ordinary Muslims—many of whom held to superficial and superstitious understandings of Islam—would fall under the sway of arguments about the contradictions of the Quran or the inferiority of Islamic civilization. As they saw it, the loss of territory, threat of secularism, and assaults on Islam were inextricably linked, all part of a larger colonial enterprise.

In the writings of the Islamic modernists, there was a simple, repeated refrain, one that would color nearly every Islamist movement to the present day. Muslims were most successful in the temporal world—in their conquest of territory, in their knowledge of the sciences, and in their technological prowess—when they were close to Islam. The more they moved away from religion, the more they suffered in this world, just as they would in the next. As Rida wrote in his refutation of the missionaries: “Indeed, [the Muslim] community was at its high point of civilization and science when holding most strongly to its religion, whereas it became distanced from the religion as it distanced itself from science.”6

The modernists hoped to arm Muslims with the tools to resist missionary arguments. The solution wasn’t literalism—far from it—but rather an effort to affirm, as they saw it, the inherent rationalism of Islam. In this respect, Rida’s refutations are perhaps most illustrative. For Rida, Islam is the “religion of reason” and “the ally of the sciences.” Islam is “nearer to mankind’s innate disposition and intelligence.”7 He advises his readers, “You may come to know your religion’s truths through logical proof and evidence.” The Quran, meanwhile, “furnishes evidences and rational proofs through which it demands certainty in faith from people of reason.”8 If it seems as if Rida had something to prove, it is because he did.

Christianity, in contrast, was portrayed as otherworldly, irrational—a religion of magical thinking. “[The word ‘reason’] is not mentioned in the bible,” Rida writes, his disdain palpable, as it so often is in the apologetics of Muslim writers at the dawn of the twentieth century.9 For similar reasons, Rida and other modernists looked at the more “mystical” of the Sufi orders with skepticism and even scorn. The practice of Sufism had been a venerable tradition, and one that was indelibly linked to the development of Islam over a millennium. As Albert Hourani notes, “Throughout the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries … the most influential currents of thought and action still flowed within the channels of the Sufi orders.”10 This made Rida’s attacks on various aspects of Sufi practice all the more striking. The Sufi emphasis on the inner, the unseen, and the nonpolitical was seen as contrary to the modernists’ insistent, self-conscious rationalism. It was an early sign of what would prove to be one of the most defining shifts within Islam: the at first slow and then rapid decline of Sufism.

Interestingly, Rida uses the incidence of miracles, or the lack thereof, to underscore Islam’s rational bent. In his book The Muhammadan Revelation, Rida opines at length about Mohamed’s prophethood, which had little need for miracles. Although Mohamed was associated with some supernatural acts, he “certainly never ordered that these be mentioned to people.” “The reason for this,” Rida argues, is that by the seventh century “humanity had entered that stage of maturity and independence in which men’s minds are not given to submitting to the incredible or unnatural. To expect this would be to hamper their intellectual progress.”11 It seems odd to hold seventh-century Arabia as a font of intellectualism or a place inhospitable to a belief in miracles. But Rida was a product of a very different age; he was trying to make Islam appear as modern as possible, at a time when it was being attacked for being the opposite.

This obsession with demonstrating Islam’s rationality and, by extension, its superiority helps explain the modernists’ anticlerical bent. The curriculum at al-Azhar—the Sunni world’s premier institution of Islamic learning—had fallen behind the times. The clerics of al-Azhar contented themselves with teaching an avowedly premodern curriculum. Rida castigated them for failing to teach secular subjects, particularly the social and biological sciences.12 They had “rendered the religion tradition-bound.”13 And so Islam had to be freed from tradition and reaffirmed with evidence and reason. Only then could Islam be made safe for modernity and modernity safe for Islam. This led to some controversial arguments. For example, according to Rida, if divine revelation appears to be in conflict with “clear-cut” rational evidence, then the latter takes precedence and the revealed text would have to, in effect, be interpreted allegorically rather than literally.14 Elsewhere, Rida reinterpreted military jihad, or “struggle,” as primarily defensive in nature, analogous in many ways to just war theory.15 Again, the implications were clear. Just as missionaries argued that Islam was irrational and full of contradiction, Western scholars had long argued that Islam was a warlike religion, inherently predisposed to violence. Rida, through unorthodox methodological and hermeneutical techniques, hoped to cast Islam in a different light. It was neither brutal nor bellicose.

Of course, Islamic modernism had its limits, and the modernists weren’t quite liberals, nor did they want to become liberals. Islamic law still provided the foundation for social and political life, but it had to be reinterpreted in the context of new norms of nationhood, democracy, and human rights. Their vision of Islam and Islamic law still fell well short of Western liberal norms, at least as Western liberals would understand them. This makes it challenging to take stock of the modernist legacy more than a century later. As the legal scholar Mohammad Fadel notes, “Modernist Islamic political thought takes the appearance of a thoroughly secular movement from the perspective of other Islamic traditions of political thought, but viewed from the perspective of humanistic political philosophy, it takes the appearance of a thoroughly religious movement.”16 In other words, it really depends on how you look at it.

* * *

KHAYR AL-DIN AL-TUNISI, the chief minister of Ottoman-ruled Tunisia in the 1870s, proposed shura, an Islamic concept meaning “consultation,” as a solution to autocracy, which he viewed as the primary sickness of the Muslim world.17 Every other Islamic reformer during this period—and up to the present day—has held shura as either the analogue or equivalent of Western-style democracy. This served the objectives of the reformers quite well. They could embrace what were effectively Western ideas and norms without compromising their traditions and heritage. After all, if shura, at its core, was about deliberation, discussion, and consent, then it wasn’t too different from democracy and could easily be used to justify democratic practices.

Most modernists saw creeping autocracy as one of the great ills of their time. As the traditional clerical class was either swept away into irrelevance or co-opted by powerful regimes, it could no longer play its historic role of checking executive authority. In this sense, the weakening of the clerics had already happened, and unlike in Europe, it was not necessarily in the service of pluralism or democracy. As Noah Feldman argues, it was the self-regulating clerical class that, as keepers of the sharia, ensured the ruler was constrained by something greater than himself.18 But if the clerics could no longer check executive power, it was time to adopt a different approach, and, here, the modernists hoped that the “people,” through elected parliaments, could serve a similar function. Consultative mechanisms and institutions, even if they weren’t quite democratic in the full sense of the word, would balance the burgeoning power of the executive.

This is where Islam and Islamic law’s aforementioned flexibility came in handy. Islam, at least as the modernists saw it, could appropriate anything from the West as long as it was good while discarding the cultural excesses that prioritized the individual over the community. This made enough intuitive sense: If the Quran was a book for all times, then its laws and principles should be appropriate for the modern era just as they were appropriate for seventh-century Arabia. If God in his wisdom had revealed Islam as a complete and comprehensive religion, that could only mean that the text and the tradition had an inherent power to renew themselves, even if it meant going where Islam hadn’t quite gone before. And this is where they went.

The state is at the center of our story, and here too the modernists were willing to come to terms with new realities. Premodern Islamic law, by definition, was incompatible with the modern nation-state. There had to be a way to square the circle, even if that meant going well beyond what textual literalists were comfortable with. It’s worth remembering that until 1924, the idea that there should be a caliphate—even if its authority and reach had been significantly weakened—was relatively uncontroversial. More than that, there was an “overwhelming” scholarly consensus that establishing and maintaining the caliphate was obligatory for Muslims.19 Al-Azhar’s Council of Senior Scholars went so far as to expel one of their own, Ali Abdul Raziq, for writing a book, published in 1925, deeming the caliphate unnecessary. Yet while Islamic union was and would remain an ideal, the modernists spoke in terms that were readily intelligible to nationalists. They recognized and acknowledged state power but hoped it could be harnessed for religious ends.

Like any movement, the Islamic modernists, while maintaining the core ideas of Afghani and Abduh, would evolve and become something other than what they were. Modernist thought was an attempt to reconcile the irreconcilable, so a certain tension wasn’t merely inevitable; it was inherent to the very enterprise. Abduh’s students, of which there were many, would come to differ on what to prioritize: Islamic identity and authenticity, on the one hand, or what Albert Hourani calls the “irreversible movement of modern civilization,” on the other.20 Some such as Qasim Amin, who wrote passionately about the emancipation of women, gravitated toward secular and liberal ideas. Others, however, provided the link between Abduh’s ideas and what would come to be called “Islamism.” The nature of this evolution is a controversial one, and that controversy can be captured in the changing views of Rashid Rida.

Rashid Rida was either a reformer or a fundamentalist—or both—depending on whom you asked. As discussed, Rida very much saw himself as a rationalist and was adamant about demonstrating Islam’s alignment with science, technology, and civilizational progress. But in his later years, largely for political rather than religious reasons, he became fascinated by a new experiment in statehood in what would become Saudi Arabia. In the 1920s, Abdelaziz Ibn Saud united large swathes of the Arabian Peninsula with the help of a religious militia inspired by Wahhabism, a particularly harsh, puritanical strain of Islam.

Rida, who was in some ways more conservative than his mentor and friend Mohamed Abduh, had a major influence on Hassan al-Banna, the next major personality in the modernist lineage. Just as Rida was, or became, more conservative than his teachers, Banna was more conservative than Rida. And this is where our story of modernists and modernism leads to the Middle East’s present predicament. In 1928, Banna founded the Muslim Brotherhood, the largest and most influential of the world’s Islamist movements. More than eighty years later, the Brotherhood remains controversial—perhaps more controversial than ever.


The Muslim Brotherhood’s Message

Understanding who came before—and what they hoped to accomplish—is crucial to understanding the basic thrust of the Muslim Brotherhood’s sociopolitical project and, by extension, the ideas that continue to animate mainstream Islamist movements across the Muslim world to this day.

The irony is that modernity and Islamism were, and are, inseparable. In fact, it’s nearly impossible to imagine one without the other. The very idea of Islamism—that Islam and Islamic law should play a central role in political life—would have been met with confused looks and blank stares at any point before the nineteenth century. But with the advent of the modernists, Islam, for really the first time, became a distinct political project. It never had to become one before because Islam’s role in public life was inescapable—it imbued nearly everything—and, more important, unquestioned. It went without saying, so it wasn’t said.

Islamism only made sense in opposition to something else—and that something else was secularism. Islam was no longer just a way of being. It was no longer the natural order of things, and so it had to be reaffirmed and reasserted. In the process, Islam became a political theology of authenticity and resistance in the face of an intertwining and overwhelming brew of secularism, colonization, and authoritarianism. This, then, is a story of how religions become religious ideologies. Islamism was inherently oppositional and unless it had something to oppose, would there really be a need for it? For now, though, the need was clear enough.

Rida’s simple formula—that the fortunes of Muslims rise and fall with their commitment to Islam—was updated and extended in the Brotherhood’s even simpler slogan “Islam is the solution.” Again, it was logical and intuitive: If losing Islam was the problem, then finding it again would undo the damage, returning Muslims to a position of strength and self-confidence.

During his lifetime, Rida’s (potentially) populist message remained confined to a relatively small number of people. Abduh and Rida were intellectuals who mostly addressed themselves to other intellectuals and elites. They were focused on reforming institutions and elite discourse. Hassan al-Banna, a schoolteacher, was interested in reform on a wider scale.21 Translating what was previously a vague idea into a program of action was his most important and lasting legacy. Far from an Egypt-centric movement, the Brotherhood’s message spread throughout the Muslim world, with affiliates, descendants, and offshoots soon emerging in dozens of countries. Today, there are Libyan, Syrian, Jordanian, and Yemeni Brotherhood branches, to name only a few, each attempting to adapt Banna’s core ideas and principles to their own local contexts.

Although his collected writings, including his “epistles,” are still pored over by Brotherhood members, Banna had little interest in developing a reputation as an author or scholar. One of his tracts—titled “Are We Practical People?”—was emblematic of his hands-on approach. As Khalil al-Anani notes, “Banna held that it would be significantly difficult to revive the Islamic identity without engaging the whole populace in a debate over such an important issue.”22 In Banna’s early years, he traveled across the country, visiting coffeehouses and talking to ordinary Egyptians about Islam and what Islam could do for them. Banna recounts in his memoirs:

I selected three main coffeehouses which were always overcrowded with people. I made a program to deliver two sermons in every coffeehouse every week. And I delivered my sermons in these coffeehouses regularly. My way of preaching proved to be a matter of astonishment for the people in the beginning. But soon they got used to it and took great interest.23

The Brotherhood was to be a mass movement. Anyone, regardless of class, social background, or occupation, could join the movement, as long as they believed in the organization’s ideals and were willing to adhere to strict standards of moral conduct.

In a mass movement like the Brotherhood’s—which could claim as many as half a million members by the 1940s—what was the role for the individual? The Brotherhood stood apart with a deceptively simple yet intricate model of social change. It began with each and every Egyptian, who was called on to reform the mind and the heart and return to Islam, embracing it as a comprehensive way of life. The reformed Muslim man would raise a good Muslim family. Enough Muslim families, in turn, would give rise to an Islamic society. If society was sufficiently Islamic, then it was only natural that the government would become Islamic as well (assuming there was some level of popular representation).

The Brotherhood needed numbers before anything else, so recruitment was a high priority. Each member was expected to introduce the organization to friends and family and to recruit supporters for specific initiatives. The Brotherhood’s tiered membership structure, something like the Boy Scouts on steroids, is one of the organization’s most innovative elements. For the truly committed, it could take as long as eight years to become a fully fledged member and reach the level of an “active” brother. But not everyone needed to become a full brother, and not everyone would want to. The membership structure reduced barriers of entry while allowing for different levels of individual commitment and interest. But for an organization whose bedrock was supposedly individuals, the Brotherhood—a massive, plodding, inflexible body—would take on a life of its own. The organization—or tanzim, as it is known in Arabic—became not just a means but also an end unto itself, a problem that would persist throughout the Brotherhood’s checkered history of success and disappointment.

From its founding, the Brotherhood was meant to be a big-tent organization that could be everything to everyone (of course, as long as you believed in the basic premise of political Islam). In his epistles, Banna writes of the inevitability of disagreements on “minor” matters. Even the Prophet’s companions had such disagreements, after all, but this didn’t keep them from their mission. A far cry from Abduh and Rida before him, Banna’s epistles are fairly straightforward and self-consciously so. “I decided to write as I speak,” Banna explains, “and to discuss my topic … without any false pretense or complexity. I simply wish people to understand me as I am, allowing my message to reach their minds devoid of any fancy ornament and decoration.”24

The basic thrust of the message was simple enough. Banna looked around and saw passivity and fatalism. This infuriated him. Muslims had fallen. Muslims were weak, divided, bickering, and in the thrall of foreign ideologies. Banna wrote of his fellow Muslims, “[T]heir faith is anaesthetized, lying dormant within their souls, one to which they do not wish to submit and act accordingly. Whereas it is a burning, blazing, intense faith fully awakened in the souls of the Muslim Brotherhood.”25


How “Modern” Is Islamism?

Centuries ago, Islam and the sharia were the natural order of things. And by sharia here, I don’t just mean “law” or specific rules and punishments. Sharia was a moral as well as a legal system, a social order, and a source of legitimacy.26 In its everyday import, it was pedestrian and prosaic, and it must have seemed to ordinary Muslims that it had always been and always would be. If you appeared in court over a business dispute, the judge, or qadi, was religiously trained. He would rule in the context of sharia. The sharia was a dynamic, living thing, which didn’t necessarily offer easy answers, and in interpreting it, the qadi enjoyed considerable leeway. Still, there was no doubt that he—and it would be a he—was working within a particular moral, legal, and religious framework. In this sense, the sharia, as commonplace and mundane as it was, reflected something deeper. The scholar of Islamic law Wael Hallaq, for example, refers to an “overarching moral apparatus” and a “hegemonic moral system.”27 Hallaq and other chroniclers of medieval Islam—and no doubt many Muslims—have a tendency to idealize the sharia for what it claimed to be rather than what it actually was. But they are right to point to a kind of enveloping power that has so far been lacking since its demise.

During the ebbs and flows of the historic caliphate, no alternative source of legitimacy was devised or even considered. Of course, within this Islamic framework, there were competing philosophical approaches to Islam, different legal schools, warring leaders, and would-be revolutionaries. There were ongoing, and occasionally violent, debates and disagreements over the relationship between the caliph—the locus of executive authority—and the clerics, who, as we have seen, enjoyed considerable independence and autonomy.

Because the law was everywhere, it, in a sense, didn’t need to assert itself or to intrude into the private lives of believers. A society imbued with Islamic law and tradition was not synonymous with intolerance and harsh restrictions. For example, the drinking of wine may have been forbidden, but many still consumed it during various periods in Islamic history.28 Great poets valorized it and royal courts flowed with it. Even as he upheld the prohibition on alcohol for the Muslim masses, as great an Islamic thinker as Ibn Sina (Avicenna) was known to enjoy wine, and without shame.29 Such behavior, as surprising as it might seem today, was not a threat to the overarching moral culture and legal structure.* An Islam that was already dominant had less need to dominate. It also couldn’t dominate, because the premodern state, unlike modern states, was simply incapable of monitoring the minutiae of everyday life.

In the premodern era, an “ordinary” Muslim could be more (or less) observant and leave it at that. Hassan al-Banna was essentially saying that this would no longer do. With the advent of modernity, secularism, and tyranny, Islam was no longer the natural order of things. Because it was taken away, it would have to be regained. Because it was weak, it would have to be strengthened. It was doubted, so it would have to be affirmed. This was an Islam that was self-conscious, and this is what made it different from what had come before. This was a distinctly modern Islam. And it would come to be known as Islamism. But this is the irony of it all: In order to retrieve something that was lost—this supposedly pure, original Islam—it would become transformed into something new and unprecedented.

In his epistles, Banna isn’t talking about a religion in the sense it’s understood in the West, but about a program to be applied and implemented. A new phrase, al-mashrou al-islami, or the “Islamic project,” entered the Islamist lexicon. It was a clinical way of looking at God and spirituality, that something as inevitably complex and varied as Islam could be a “solution” for the mundane problems of everyday life.

It was little surprise, then, that Banna’s message resonated with Egypt’s professional classes. Engineers, doctors, and lawyers would be the leaders of this new movement, with the rank and file drawn from the middle and lower-middle classes (rather than Egypt’s most destitute). The organization’s can-do attitude was appealing to upwardly mobile Egyptians, particularly those who had just moved to cities like Cairo and Alexandria and had no preexisting social or professional networks.

As massive as the organization would become, it remained, in another sense, local and personalized. As long as the movement operated in different fields and served different purposes, there would be a long list of reasons to join. Some joined it for the simple reason that being part of the Brotherhood provided moral purpose and guidance. This, in turn, would help them “get into heaven.” For others, it was the sense of belonging and, well, brotherhood. For the charity-minded, there was the Brotherhood’s social work—providing health care, youth activities, educational and “self-help” courses, and even assistance finding jobs. Still others were interested in the group’s explicitly political work, whether it was street protest, parliamentary advocacy, running for office, or (in the 1940s) sending volunteers to fight against an incipient Israeli state. But, more likely, it was a combination of all of these elements, with some being more important than others, depending on each member’s inclinations.

Being so many different things to so many people—with hundreds of thousands of members from wide-ranging backgrounds—presented its own set of problems. In the long run, the Brotherhood, and its members, wanted an “Islamic state.” But no one knew what exactly that state looked like. And how could they? To the extent that “Islamism” was something new, their conception of the Islamic state would be new as well. How would it be organized and how would it execute its policies? How would it come into being?

When it came to the form and content of their preferred end state, Brotherhood leaders had an interest in remaining vague. Hovering within generality and abstraction is the task of any big-tent movement. Getting into too much detail would inevitably provoke disagreement among the group’s varied membership. It was better for the Islamic state to remain an inspiration and an aspiration, but not too much more. Armed with the haze of nostalgia, members could project their hopes and dreams on the blank canvas of a state that would likely never come into being in their (or their children’s) lifetimes.

It also helped that the Brotherhood’s leaders were gradualists par excellence. They were playing the long game. (I was always struck by how, even in their darkest moments, they would maintain an unwavering—and, as far as I could tell, sincere—belief in their eventual victory.) They believed that history—and God—moved with them, and so it was never a question of whether but when they would prevail. This is a theme that repeats itself. Just two months before the Arab uprisings began, Egypt was experiencing what, at the time, seemed like an especially hopeless period. I was in Egypt for those November elections—arguably the most fraudulent Egypt had ever seen. In 2005, the Brotherhood had won an unprecedented eighty-eight seats in parliament. This time around, the Mubarak regime wouldn’t even allow them one seat. But they accepted their fate in stride. I spoke to Hamdi Hassan, head of the Brotherhood’s parliamentary bloc, at his campaign office in Alexandria. “In the lifespan of mankind,” he told me, “eighty years isn’t long; it’s like eight seconds.”30

Little did the Brotherhood know that just months later, Mubarak, in power for more than thirty years, would fall after just eighteen days of mass protests. And even then, at the height of euphoria, it would have been absurd to suggest that the Muslim Brotherhood’s Mohamed Morsi, a man relatively few Egyptians had heard of, would become president the following year. The arc of history moved in unpredictable ways, yet it seemed to bend toward the Brotherhood. Or at least that’s how they wanted to see it.

* * *

AS DARK AS THEIR history may have been, there were few moments darker than August 14, 2013. The Egyptian military—the bedrock of the state since modern Egypt’s founding—staged a coup against President Morsi on July 3. Just a year after their crowning achievement, it was yet another striking reversal of fortune for the Brotherhood. Knowing that the army was planning to move in and dismantle their mass sit-in near Rabaa al-Adawiya mosque in Cairo, Brotherhood members wrote their wills and prepared their families for what was to come. But in Rabaa, there was, oddly enough, a sense of relief and calm. They believed they were right.

When the blow came, it came as a shock. They knew it would be bad, but this—over eight hundred killed in mere hours—was worse than anyone had expected. Human Rights Watch called it the worst mass killing in modern Egyptian history.31 After the massacre, it was only natural to ask why. For the faithful, believing that God created man and simply left him to his own devices—even if that led to terrible evil—wasn’t really an option. There had to be some meaning, however hidden. This is the province of “theodicy,” which seeks to explain why God permits evil in the world. Far from just an esoteric exercise, the problem of theodicy impacts very real questions of how religious movements, Islamist or otherwise, interpret evil and, perhaps more important, how they respond to it.

The post–Arab Spring era has featured quite a lot of “evil”: a list of massacres too long to recount, bloody civil wars (including more than 400,000 killed in Syria), the Islamic State’s apparent pleasure in savagery, the resurgence of a brutal authoritarianism, and so on. The brutality is often shocking, but brutality, even on such a scale, is not new. What is perhaps more troubling is how the region’s collapse—after a moment of euphoria and promise—undermines the liberal faith that history moves with purpose toward something better. Even the notion of evil is something we struggle to accept. As the philosopher John Gray writes, “In its official forms, secular liberalism rejects the idea of evil. Many liberals would like to see the idea of evil replaced by a discourse of harm: we should talk instead about how people do damage to each other and themselves.”32 It becomes more challenging, however, to see evil as something exceptional and contrary to history’s arc when it is always around you.

To the extent that evil exists and is making a comeback of sorts, how do the people of the Middle East process it? What, if anything, is God trying to tell the faithful? In this sense, the problem of theodicy has assumed a renewed urgency. There is little to suggest that violence, and the dehumanization that leads to it, will diminish anytime soon in the Middle East. How Muslims answer the question of theodicy, then, has considerable practical import. It’s not a topic that comes up naturally, in part because it can arouse some very personal and trying questions about one’s faith in God. But it is often lingering somewhere there in the background.

One Muslim Brotherhood activist—who had quite literally prepared for death in Rabaa—was able to leave Egypt shortly after the massacre. A year and a half later, when I met him over Indian food at a London mainstay for Islamist exiles (the restaurant, for one, didn’t serve alcohol), he recalled a debate he had had with some friends. Was this a test—the righteous, after all, have always had their faith tested—or was it a punishment for having strayed from God’s path? He wasn’t sure. I could tell that he was torn. But he floated the idea that, perhaps, the Muslim Brotherhood had been tempted by power, that they had diverted too much of their attention to politics and lost sight of their original, animating mission—to be among the people spreading God’s word. He wondered whether the purported rise in atheism in Egypt was a sign that something had gone very wrong.

But, in reality, a lot had gone wrong well before the coup in Egypt. Let us to return for a moment to Rida’s words. He had said that the Muslim world was “at its high point … when holding most strongly to its religion.”33 But weren’t Egyptians, and Arabs more generally, doing just that, holding more strongly to their religion? The Brotherhood and other Islamist movements had made substantial inroads in society. Secular nationalism and socialism had been discredited while Islam and Islamism filled the vacuum. Starting in the early 1970s, more and more women began donning the head scarf. Men grew their beards. Universities became hotbeds of Islamist protest, challenging—and soon replacing—a long-dominant left. The Brotherhood, whose organizational structures were wiped out by Gamal Abdel Nasser in the 1950s and ’60s, was granted another lease on life when President Anwar el-Sadat released its leaders from prison. But it went well beyond the Brotherhood, which was more a reflection than the cause of Egypt’s religious revival. Buoyed by these changes—and with hundreds of thousands of Egyptians returning from work in the Gulf both wealthier and more conservative—the Brotherhood grew more assertive and influential, further driving a bottom-up Islamization of society, which spread across social class, geography, and economic background. There was little doubt: More and more Egyptians, even those who disliked the Brotherhood, were heeding at least part of the Brotherhood’s call.

After all the suffering and sacrifice, this was a great, unlikely victory. But it laid bare the challenge—some would say impossibility—of translating “Islam is the solution” from rhetoric into practice. If Islam was the solution and if it began, before anything else, with the individual, the family, and the community, then how come the growing piety of Arabs wasn’t translating into more tangible improvements in living standards, scientific advancement, or regional unity?

This is where the slow, plodding gradualism—and the long time horizon—of groups like the Brotherhood come into play. If eighty years were like eight seconds, as Hamdi Hassan had said to me, then it would be too soon to judge the Brotherhood’s success. The long game was built into the Brotherhood’s message as well as its organizational structure, and its members knew from the moment they joined that patience would be the most prized of virtues. Banna had warned his followers that this would be a “long, enduring, and continuous struggle,” and it was a struggle consisting of different stages, some more explicit than others.34


The Long Game

The “politics of stages,” or siyasit al-marahil, is one of the Brotherhood’s more controversial ideas and one that can be interpreted in a number of different ways depending on whom you ask. For an organization as ambitious as the Brotherhood, gradualism almost went without saying. Some of the early extremist groups that went their own way in the 1970s hoped to surgically seize the state apparatus through armed insurrection or military coup. The Brotherhood was interested in something quite different: the reform of society. There was no obvious shortcut, since the state couldn’t simply force people to become more religious. Instead, the groundwork had to be laid, and that could only happen when enough Egyptians experienced a change of heart. If the masses were ready and willing to embrace the Brotherhood’s message, then—and only then—could there be a serious discussion of the next step: a change in government or even regime.

At the Brotherhood’s fifth annual conference in 1939, Banna urged caution:

If anyone of you wishes to pick a fruit before it is ripe and to pick a flower before it blossoms, I shall never agree with them.… If, however, you exercise patience and wait for the seed to germinate, the plant to grow, the fruit to ripen and then the most suitable time for the plucking of the fruit, then your recompense shall remain safe with Allah.35

This is what happens when absolute religious ideals—and hopes far out into the future—run up against the realities of everyday, mundane politics. Something at one stage might not be appropriate for another. Why contest the majority of parliamentary seats when parliaments are weak and subservient and when doing so only serves to provoke the regime anyway? Why go into any great detail about what an Islamic government might look like when there is no real prospect of governing? Why talk about changing the international system and promoting Islamic unity, or even use the word “caliphate,” when the international system won’t allow it?

Until you were ready, the temptations of power were to be resisted. While Banna railed against British colonialism, he worked, at least initially, to build a working relationship with the British-backed monarchy, and particularly Ali Mahir Pasha, the royal councilor, who developed a reputation as the Brotherhood’s patron in the king’s court. The Brotherhood was willing to strike controversial deals with the authorities, so long as it allowed them greater organizational freedom and furthered their objectives. In 1952, the Brotherhood provided crucial logistical support to the Free Officers on the day of the military coup that made Egypt into a republic. The leader of the Free Officers was none other than Nasser. Later, the Brotherhood put its support behind Nasser’s Revolutionary Command Council when it was most vulnerable, during a brief but critical phase in 1954, when the forces supporting a return to parliamentary life appeared to have the upper hand.36 Nasser’s consolidation of power, at the expense of the political parties, parliament, and other vestiges of the ancien regime, was the prelude to his brutal dismantling of the Muslim Brotherhood.

The Brotherhood’s history, then, is a history of questionable alliances and fairweather friends, of playing the long game well but playing it almost too well. Although it is not widely known, Nasser himself was briefly a Muslim Brotherhood member, having joined the Brotherhood’s “secret apparatus” as a young officer in the 1940s. Khaled Mohieddin, a friend and associate of Nasser’s in the Free Officers, recounts the moment of initiation in his autobiography:

We were taken into a totally darkened room where we heard a voice and, placing our hand on the Quran and a gun and repeating after the voice, we took an oath of obedience and total allegiance for better or worse, to the Grand Master [Hassan al-Banna], swearing by the Book of God and the sunna of the Prophet.37

President Sadat—who would turn against the Brotherhood in the late 1970s—also had a complex relationship with the movement as a young man. In 1940, on the night of the Prophet Mohamed’s birthday, Banna first met the young Sadat, who thereafter served as the primary liaison between the Brotherhood and the Free Officers. Sadat recounts the sense of mystery that enveloped Banna. Sadat left the meeting overwhelmed, his admiration for Banna “unbounded.”38 The man was “like a saint,” Sadat recalled. “It seemed strange to me but here was a theologian with a sense of reality, a man of religion who recognized the facts.”39 The two men—Banna was thirty-four and Sadat only twenty-two—met regularly for two years and developed a close friendship.

Success and failure were thus inextricably intertwined for the Muslim Brotherhood. What then does it mean to claim victory, when the movement’s greatest victories were followed by its worst disappointments? Other Islamist movements have struggled with many of the same questions. Here, the ghosts of Algeria loom large. In the landmark elections of 1991, Algeria’s main Islamist party, the Islamic Salvation Front (FIS), stood on the brink of a historic victory, winning 47.5 percent of the vote and 188 of 231 seats in the first round. However, there were mounting fears that the military was preparing to move against them. In the tense days that followed, FIS leader Abdelkader Hachani addressed a crowd of supporters. “Victory is more dangerous than defeat,” he told them.40 But it was too late. The military made its move, aborted the elections, and plunged the country into a bloody civil war.

This decades-long experience of repression has tended to make mainstream Islamists even more cautious and circumspect than they would have otherwise been. As Islamists rose to newfound prominence and influence in the 1990s and 2000s, the world—including the West—began to pay closer attention. Regional and international powers were skeptical of Islamists in the best of times; they could be outright hostile in the worst. Being more explicit about their intentions and going into detail about what “Islamization” might entail could prove dangerous for Islamists. And what was the point of getting ahead of themselves and alienating potential allies, including liberals and secularists at home, when they would gain little in return?

It was a delicate balancing act: the need to say different things to different audiences at different times. The gap between what Islamists believed and what they could realistically do seemed to grow larger and more pronounced the closer they approached the halls of power. For any ideological movement, the tensions between untethered objectives—what you would want in an ideal world if you had unlimited resources and few domestic constraints—and political reality is a disorienting one. It is even more so for Islamists, since they have to contend with an unusually inhospitable environment. Islamists obviously take scripture seriously, and that scripture includes rules and regulations. Some of these rules—particularly the hudud criminal punishments—are controversial in a way that they never would have been in the premodern period. But even more “realistic” proposals, such as restricting alcohol consumption, segregating the sexes in public schools, or Islamizing educational curricula, are bound to attract unwanted controversy. In countries that receive little Western attention, such as Indonesia and Malaysia, Islamists and secularists alike can experiment with sharia ordinances at the local level.

The Middle East, however, is different (and, in any case, Middle Eastern states tend to be centralized and top-heavy, so sharia by way of under-the-radar local councils isn’t much of an option). Threatened with repression and fearful of provoking Western opprobrium, there were simply some things Islamists could not say. As we will see in the following chapters, this would reach tragicomic levels, as in Turkey, where the then mayor of Istanbul—and future president—Recep Tayyip Erdogan was imprisoned for reciting an overtly Islamic poem. In effect, Islamists in Turkey had to cease being Islamists. This suppression of self proved both unhealthy and unsustainable. In Tunisia, the Islamists of Ennahda adopted a similar approach, downplaying their Islamism and making a mad dash for the center.

The unique situation Islamists find themselves in leads to confounding debates: What do they really believe? Does it even matter what they believe in their hearts? This presents a problem for Islamists if and when they try to moderate their rhetoric and adopt “liberal” positions. Their opponents look at these changes and wonder if they’re merely tactical, a product of domestic and international constraints. Among secular elites, attitudes toward Islamists tend to be “inelastic,” meaning that what Islamists do—or don’t do—has little effect on how their opponents view them. Islamist moderation can even have the opposite effect of what is intended, exacerbating instead of lessening distrust. This is a particular problem in Tunisia, where Ennahda’s sanitized visage—including tailored suits and skinny black ties at the party headquarters—and always on-point messaging seem almost too good to be true. To a skeptical eye, it might appear insincere and perhaps even evidence of bad faith. With the very foundations of the state in question, there is little incentive to believe the best of your political adversaries.

Although perhaps frustrating for outside observers and political opponents, the politics of stages serves a purpose for Islamist organizations, helping maintain internal morale and cohesion. As Khalil al-Anani notes, stages give the Brotherhood leadership “room for maneuver and manipulation as the temporal link between the stages is blurred.”41 In addition, they encourage patience, since the latter stages may never be reached in a member’s lifetime. At the same time, they provide the illusion of progress and offer something to aspire to and hope for, always near but just out of reach. And when that isn’t enough, there’s the promise of glad tidings in the afterlife. That, after all, is the only guarantee. As Banna writes, “One carries out a duty firstly for the sake of doing so, then secondly for a reward in the hereafter, and thirdly for personal advantage. If he works in this way and performs his duty, he will thenceforth win Allah’s approval.”42 There is also the famous saying of the Prophet Mohamed: “Actions are judged by their intentions.” In other words, the faithful aren’t responsible for outcomes that are well beyond their control. The best they can do is prepare and work to the best of their ability. The rest is in God’s hands. If Muslims don’t experience his reward in this life, then no matter: They will experience it in the next.

There is always an out, particularly if you have faith. Failure is in the eye of the beholder. After the 2013 coup, the Brotherhood experienced an unprecedented crackdown. The movement was discredited by its own failures in government. The top tiers of the Brotherhood were either thrown in jail or forced to flee, starting new lives in other countries, all the while wondering if they’d ever be able to set foot in Egypt again. Yet I was always amazed by the ability of many in the Brotherhood to cast a debacle of historic proportions in a more positive light. One London-based activist pointed to the unexpected death in January 2015 of the eighty-one-year-old Brotherhood leader Gomaa Amin. He died in exile. When Amin was wasting away in Nasser’s dungeons as a young man, he never would have dreamed that, after three or four cycles of repression, there would be a Brotherhood president in his lifetime, but there had been. For the Brotherhood activist, Amin’s story meant one thing: This was not the end. It was just another stage. Just as there would be other cycles of repression, there would be other political openings.


The Illusion of Unity

One of the great ironies is that a movement that saw itself as a unifying force in a time of division became one of the most divisive movements of the modern era. Banna wrote that the competing ideologies of the twentieth century—liberalism, nationalism, communism, fascism—had “arisen like a stormy sea, dividing men’s hearts and throwing their minds into confusion.”43 The basic premise of Islamism was that Islam was the natural, authentic setting for all believing Muslims. In Rashid Rida’s words, it was “the religion of innate disposition.”44 In that sense, Islamism wasn’t meant to be an ideology among others; it was meant to resolve the problem of ideology. But while a return to the spirit of the first Muslims was possible, a return to a time before ideology was not. Islam, in the premodern period, was a source of unity. No one, then, questioned the organizing premise that Islam and the sharia were the order of things. But that will never be the case again: The modern era—and the introduction of what were originally Western ideologies—has irrevocably changed the region, as well as the religion itself.

As scholars of political culture are quick to note, culture is not something that changes quickly. Culture is made up of the symbols, norms, and values that resonate with ordinary citizens. These are the things that are deeply embedded, drawing on the accumulated weight of history. Depending on your perspective, this can be good or bad. The Brazilian sociologist turned president Fernando Cardoso spoke of the “dead weight of the past,”45 a weight that would have to be lifted, likely under duress. For others, the past is something to be embraced. Either way, everything that comes before has an effect on what comes after—what political scientists call “path dependence.” In other words, once a particular path is chosen—and the longer one walks on it—the more difficult it is to go back to the original fork and start over.

It doesn’t happen often, but this cultural inertia can be broken by external or internal shocks to the political system. When nations or even empires become stagnant, there is the possibility of revolution from within. But, failing that, the most that can be hoped for—or feared—is that foreigners will provoke or force fundamental changes through military attack or invasion. Crises can be imposed on countries that want nothing of the sort. One such moment was September 11, 2001, when a horrifying attack executed by a few men ended up changing the course of American history.

External shocks helped bring about the transformation, and ultimately the demise, of the Ottoman caliphate. The most basic assumptions of religion and state—the order of things as they had been for the better part of fourteen centuries—were dismantled with the advent of modernity. What transpired were decades of sustained cultural and political assault, including, in some instances, the brutal colonial occupation of Muslim lands. If this couldn’t break the religious and political status quo of the Middle East, then nothing would.

To say, though, that these changes were simply a matter of foreign intervention would be a mistake. The confrontation between East and West entailed considerable violence, of course, but it also brought a more intense exchange of ideas. It was no accident that the works of the great Islamic modernists were influenced by their time spent traveling and studying in Europe. As we saw earlier, the new ideas being introduced into the region—ideas of democracy, popular sovereignty, universal rights, and women’s empowerment—were genuinely attractive (within limits), even to the most pious. Not only that, the colonized made good use of these “Western” ideas, turning them against their European occupiers in wars of national liberation. Many of these insurgent groups, particularly in countries like Algeria, were deeply influenced by Marxist and nationalist intellectuals and philosophers. They weren’t fighting to restore the old caliphate but for their own independent nations. It wouldn’t have made much sense to fight for something that had ceased to exist and that the Turks themselves had agreed to abolish.

It is difficult to overstate how radical these changes were. The rerendering of the region was experienced as a series of shocks—invasions, revolutions, anticolonial struggles, military coups, and world wars—touching the lives, to one degree or another, of every Arab and Muslim. For the first time, there were real intellectual and philosophical alternatives to the old legal, moral, and social order, a far cry from when the sharia stood uncontested. The decline of Islamic empires and the rise of Europe forced the people of the Middle East to ask themselves difficult questions they hadn’t previously thought to ask. For the first time, there were alternative notions of political community that were just as compelling, if not more so, to a growing number of Muslims. Once ideas of democracy, nationalism, and the nation-state were introduced, the effects couldn’t be undone. Muslims now lived in an increasingly interconnected world, where they were bombarded with new images and ideologies. For non-Muslim minorities, the idea of “citizenship” in a secular state held the promise of full equality. They could never truly be members of the worldwide Muslim community, or umma, but they could be part of a new Arabist project. Across the Arab world, the British and French introduced constitutions, parties, and parliaments (although they rarely allowed these institutions to challenge their rule). For those who preferred more militant approaches, there was the rise of nationalist and even fascist parties, which were experiencing unprecedented success in Europe between the world wars. There was no choice but to engage with these new “Western” ideas, even if to ultimately reject them.

Islamists, for their part, were not among those who counseled simpleminded rejection. They recognized that certain concepts developed in and by the West could be worth embracing. For example, as Banna writes:

Nobody can ignore the freedom [the democratic system] has secured for peoples and nations alike, and the justice it has introduced to the human mind in allowing it to think freely, and to the human being as a whole in allowing him the freedom to fulfill himself; and, apparently, giving power to the people. Indeed, international relations after the First World War came as a proof of the legitimacy of these ideas and most of the world turned towards them wholeheartedly.46

Of course there was a “but,” as there almost always was when saying something nice about the West. Banna, for example, railed against the “unlimited freedom” that undermined the family structure, but he was clearly willing to acknowledge that aspects of democracy reflected human progress and could be used to build on and advance his own mission. There was a conscious attempt to incorporate these new ideas into an Islamic framework or, put differently, to Islamize them as if they were intrinsic and inevitable elements of the Islamic tradition.

This was yet another sign that political Islam, for all of its seemingly reactionary tendencies, bought into that most modern of assumptions: that history moved with purpose and that progress was inescapable. The Ottoman-era caliphate, then, was a relic of the past. It had failed to evolve with the times, and so it was little surprise that the Ottoman Empire found itself unable to compete with Europe’s success and soon crumbled from within. The new ideology that Banna was offering was meant to be an improvement on what came before, building toward a new Islamic synthesis.

But there would be others—liberals, socialists, secularists, and nationalists—who, for various reasons, did not feel a need to base their political identity on Islam. This didn’t mean they were impious—some of them, in fact, were quite devout. Islamism was a step beyond merely being an observant Muslim, and it required a conscious commitment. If you wished to join the Brotherhood, it meant pledging loyalty, or baya‘a, to the general guide. But the more important point here is that in this new era, there were alternatives to the umma. Socialists and liberals alike believed that membership in a political community should be based on secular grounds. Islam could still play a role, but it needn’t be the defining consideration.

Any ideology was bound to be divisive, no matter what the original intentions. Ideologies are purposeful constructions. They can only be recognizable as ideologies insofar as they oppose other ideologies. If there were something called “Islamists,” then there would always be those who weren’t and were called something else. To the extent that Islamism was synonymous with the Brotherhood’s version of it, even those who might have been sympathetic to its basic premise might find themselves in the opposing camp for more mundane political reasons. They may have been uncomfortable with the Brotherhood’s insular nature, its requirement to pledge loyalty to the leader, or its neoliberal economic orientation. This might have weakened, perhaps fatally, the unifying potential of Islamist parties, but it was a boon in other ways. Islamists drew strength and support from their underdog status. Hoping to unseat the elite, they were the counterelite. They seemed most at peace when their backs were to the wall. The struggle for survival became its own kind of victory. In short, Islamism was supposed to be different. It needed Gamal Abdel Nasser just as much as it needed Hassan al-Banna. For Islamists, religion had to be politicized, but doing so came at a price.





