6. Tunisia: Islamists Conceding Their Islamism


Islamists’ obsession with the state had blinded them in Egypt, leading them into an untenable situation. Despite protestations from its own members—as well as Brotherhood affiliates across the region—the Muslim Brotherhood decided to run a presidential candidate. In so doing, the most influential Islamist organization of the past century assumed responsibility for the management of one of the Middle East’s most unwieldy states.

For a movement that sought to maintain some degree of purity, these were fateful decisions. In its original iterations, mainstream Islamism was supposed to rise above party and even state. Islamists would often say that they didn’t care about power for its own sake; what mattered were the ideas that they stood for. If others could be faithful to these same ideas, then they would happily lend their support. (To this day, there is a stigma within Brotherhood movements against too readily showing your interest in power and position. Self-nomination is in bad taste. Your fellow Brothers are the ones to nominate you.)

The state, in any case, was supposed to be an organic reflection of whatever society happened to be. The state depended on society. Who was in power and how they wielded it was the final result in a long, gradual process of societal transformation, so, in theory, securing the presidency shouldn’t have seemed so decisive and urgent. To show such desperation for power was to, in a sense, accept the inverse of the Brotherhood’s original proposition that change began with the individual. It was as if the Brotherhood had lost faith in the generative possibilities of bottom-up transformation.

In Turkey, the state, as led by Erdogan and the AKP, was the focal point of an effort to raise a new Islamic generation.1 Even the word “raise” was problematic, suggesting a state taking on a set of responsibilities normally reserved for mosque, family, and community. Tying such explicitly religious efforts to a particular partisan vehicle was a risky endeavor. If advocating a more prominent role for Islam in politics—or merely being outwardly religious—became associated with a particular party, then the party’s political failures and policy missteps could reflect negatively on the piety of the pious. In Turkey, for example, 74 percent of Muslims who pray five times a day supported Erdogan in 2014, compared with 67 percent in 2010.2 In the June 2015 elections, AKP’s conservative base was large, but not large enough for a parliamentary majority, with the party experiencing a significant drop in overall support. As long as Islamist parties saw success, there was nothing to worry about. When the AKP was presiding over a doubling of GDP per capita and a near tripling of gross GDP in ten years, Turkish Islamism came to be associated with good government and improved living standards.3 But what if it came to be associated with political divisiveness, the muzzling of journalists, and a sputtering economy?

If the AKP was the first great Islamist hope—before falling out of favor after Erdogan’s authoritarian turn—then Tunisia’s Islamists were the newest darlings. With the rest of the region’s descent into civil war and repression, they also had the benefit of being the only darlings. If anyone was attuned to the dangers of failing and falling short, it was Tunisia’s main Islamist party, Ennahda, or “renaissance” in Arabic.


The Great Islamist Hope

It was easy to believe in Ennahda’s promise. Unlike other Islamist parties in the region, where younger members continuously struggled to gain traction, Ennahda had nurtured a new generation of leaders and activists who looked and sounded different.

At just twenty-eight years old, speaking fluent English and French, Sayida Ounissi was one of Tunisia’s youngest members of parliament. She had grown up in exile, leaving Tunisia for Paris when she was only nine. Her father, an Ennahda member, had been tortured. In early 2015, we met for the first time over coffee at a chic bed-and-breakfast owned by a Palestinian-American expatriate, who had grown up between New York and Beirut. Wearing a fashionable head scarf, she was proud that Ennahda had “stopped” instrumentalizing religion for political gain, unlike secular parties that, despite (or perhaps because of) their secularism, were increasingly peppering speeches and statements with prophetic sayings and Quranic verses. She, on the other hand, knew who and what she was. She didn’t feel the need to overcompensate with rhetorical flourishes. But, for her, there was a bigger risk, and, as someone who had firsthand experience with repression, the fear that those dark days might return was always underneath the surface. “Using” religion might work in the short term, but it could just as easily backfire. “If we as Ennahda keep disappointing you, that shouldn’t keep you from praying,” she told me. “If one day, we [become unpopular] and win only ten percent of the vote, we don’t want mosques to be attacked, and we don’t want women with hijab to be threatened on the streets.”4

As with so many other Islamist parties, the long game was the only game worth playing. Ennahda’s brief stint in power from December 2011 to the end of 2013, as part of a coalition with two secular parties, was a difficult and taxing experience, but it was nothing compared with their previous experiences in politics. Throughout much of the 1990s and 2000s, Ennahda had effectively ceased to exist after strongman Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali systematically dismantled the organization. Party leaders found themselves in prison or in exile, scattered mostly in England, France, and Italy. When Ben Ali fell in the first stirrings of the Arab Spring, Ennahda experienced a dizzying rise to power, claiming victory—and the prime ministership—in the country’s first-ever democratic elections. Looking back, they could claim some success. They had shown that power sharing between Islamists and secularists was possible, something that couldn’t be said for most of Tunisia’s neighbors. Perhaps most important, a relatively liberal constitution was passed with broad consensus in January 2014.

Yet it could have easily all fallen apart, and in spring 2013, it almost did. After the assassinations of two prominent leftists, polarization reached unprecedented levels. Leftist groups such as the Popular Front held Ennahda “indirectly responsible” for the assassinations, arguing that the party had allowed extremists too much room to operate.5 The fear of a return to repression—magnified by the military coup in Egypt—animated Tunisia’s Islamists. Ennahda leaders did whatever they could to avoid any confrontation that might scuttle a hard-fought democratic transition. Most of the secular opposition called for dissolving either the democratically elected constituent assembly or the democratically elected government, or both. The echoes of Egypt were hard to miss, as various opposition groups did away with subtlety. Tunisia’s own Tamarrod modeled itself after Egypt’s Tamarrod (Rebellion) movement, which was instrumental in toppling Morsi. Tunisia’s Salvation Front, drawing inspiration from Egypt’s National Salvation Front, announced a campaign to remove local and national officials appointed by Ennahda.6

Developments in Egypt confirmed Ennahda’s worst fears, that Islamists would never be allowed to govern, no matter how many elections they won.7 When I spoke to Ennahda cofounder and leader Rached Ghannouchi in early 2015, well after the memory of Egypt had faded, the coup loomed large in his recounting of events. As a result of Egypt, he told me, “the opposition raised its ambitions and the ceiling of its demands to bring down the system with the power of the street.… They even called their groups the same names as in Egypt!”8 I would have expected Ennahda officials, speaking to a Western researcher like myself, to attribute their willingness to make unusual compromises to their being good, magnanimous democrats. But many Ennahda leaders clearly saw the downfall of their fellow Islamists in visceral, and quite personal, terms. “I was shocked by Rabaa,” Meherzia Laabidi, vice president of the constituent assembly, told me, her voice rising. “They are not human beings this ISIS group, but in Egypt it was the state that did this. This cruel aspect of the Egyptian conflict—it had a big, dissuasive power in Tunisia. Nobody wants this in Tunisia. This pushed politicians to sit around the table and talk.”9 Or, as Imen Ben Mohamed, a thirty-year-old Ennahda member of parliament, explained it, “We’re sorry for what happened in Egypt, but it led to a result which was in a kind of way positive for our base. They saw how the Brotherhood’s insistence on unilateral acts might benefit you in the short term, but you lose in the long run. Your existence in the political scene is tied to the guarantee of democracy.”10

With the Tunisian experiment at a standstill and threatened with collapse, Ennahda, to its credit, voluntarily stepped down from power after protracted negotiations. As positive as this was—any number of frightening scenarios were averted—this wasn’t what one might expect in “normal” democratic circumstances. Ennahda had been elected in free and fair elections. As is the practice in parliamentary democracies, the opposition could have attempted to bring down the government through a no-confidence vote. Ennahda, for its part, could have called early elections, allowing Tunisians to choose a different course if they wished. This, though, is not what happened. Sensing an opportunity, secularists weren’t quite willing to let the democratic process play out on its own. Ennahda, in effect, was forced to give up power.

In this sense, Tunisia, despite all of its progress, was, and still is, very much in transition. Democratic competition hasn’t been “normalized,” and so a religiously oriented party like Ennahda has to play by a different set of rules. Sayida Ounissi described the Tunisian predicament as two high-speed trains—Islamists and secular hard-liners—hurtling toward each other. Someone had to choose the safer path. After stepping down from power, the compromises continued. Ennahda, the largest, best-organized party in the country, opted not to run a presidential candidate. Not only that, they didn’t even endorse a candidate. Then during the 2014 parliamentary elections, there was the odd spectacle of the losing party celebrating its loss, not too dissimilar from the pre–Arab Spring phenomenon of Islamist parties “losing on purpose.”11 As one senior Ennahda figure put it, “We were relieved and relieved and relieved.”12

It might have seemed similarly odd when Ennahda decided to join a coalition government with the secular Nidaa Tounes party in February 2015. Ounissi acknowledged that it might be difficult for Americans like me to understand. Democrats and Republicans would never want to be in the same government together, she told me. On this she was probably right, but it does raise the question of why Ennahda, once again, did something a “normal” democratic party wouldn’t do. Despite coming in second place in the October 2014 elections—winning a solid 31 percent of the seats—it agreed to only one ministry (the thankless Ministry of Employment) out of a total twenty-one, as well as three junior state secretary posts. If you were going to join the government, why accept only one cabinet post? A lone minister might have seemed symbolic, but that was precisely the point: Any marginalization of Islamists would prove much more difficult with Ennahda inside rather than out.

Despite the discontent among the rank and file, Ennahda’s leaders believe—almost as a matter of faith—that this is the path they must follow. One of those leaders was Said Ferjani, profiled by the late, great journalist Anthony Shadid in a 2012 New York Times article. In his earlier years, Ferjani was something of a radical, plotting a coup d’état against the Tunisian “founding father” Habib Bourguiba. In an unlikely twist, Ben Ali, Bourguiba’s interior minister, beat Ferjani and his comrades to it, staging his own coup seventeen hours before theirs. Ferjani was later arrested, suffering unspeakable torture—including a fractured spine—at the hands of his captors.13

In the interviews with Shadid, Ferjani recounts his time studying with Rached Ghannouchi in the 1970s, who, he said, “was always talking about the world and politics. Why as Muslims are we backwards? What makes us backwards? Is it our destiny to be so?”14 Ennahda’s leaders hoped to answer that same question, long ago asked by the Islamic modernists, in their own particular way. Their methods, though, had evolved considerably. This was the long game par excellence. When I challenged Ferjani on Ennahda’s strategy after the party’s disappointing finish in the 2014 elections, he acknowledged a trade-off: “We know we’re going to lose some of our popularity by being in government and accepting a cabinet post.”15 He emphasized that “this is a transition”—one that might last fifteen to twenty years—and so I would have to judge Ennahda’s behavior with that in mind. He returned to this theme repeatedly. This was an exceptional period, and the goal was to solidify the transition, entrench consensual democratic norms, and guarantee basic freedoms, even if doing so meant undermining party unity or disappointing an increasingly impatient base.

* * *

DEPENDING ON HOW YOU look at it, Ennahda’s approach represented either the politics of prudence or the triumph of magical thinking. Throughout the 2014 election campaign, Ennahda, unlike most other parties, played as clean as one could possibly imagine. It deemphasized its Islamism and moved to the “center,” portraying itself as the party of national consensus. Ennahda’s most prominent spokesmen were young, conspicuously beardless technocrats who talked endlessly about solutions to everyday economic challenges. Just from listening, there was no way of knowing that they were members of an Islamist party. One campaign organizer described the self-conscious, mannered style to me as Ennahda’s “new look” and took pride in the party’s conscious move away from the use of religious rhetoric.16

Where Ennahda downplayed its ideological distinctiveness, Nidaa Tounes played up the Islamist-secular divide with a simple, straightforward call to arms. The varied factions of Nidaa Tounes—made up of old-regime elements, leftists, and business-oriented neoliberals—couldn’t agree on much, but they could agree that Islamists and Islamism were an existential threat and needed to be defeated. Anne Wolf, in one of the few studies of Tunisian secularists, wrote that the “focus on anti-Islamism is one of [Nidaa Tounes’s] greatest weaknesses.”17 This may have been true in an abstract sense, but polarization, ideological sharpness, and personal attacks apparently made for good electoral politics. Nidaa Tounes, which hadn’t even existed in 2011, registered a first-place finish with 37.5 percent of the vote and eighty-six seats. Meanwhile, in the presidential elections, the party’s standard-bearer, the eighty-eight-year-old Beji Caid Essebsi, sailed to an easy victory. (On the other hand, as Ghannouchi became more conciliatory, reaching out across the aisle and portraying himself as a kind of founding father, his favorability ratings cratered.18)

Essebsi’s critics argued that his rise marked a blow to the revolution. Essebsi was an early member of Ben Ali’s administration and served as minister of interior and minister of defense under Habib Bourguiba. Polling numbers indicate many secular Tunisians might not mind—a preelection Pew survey found that less observant Tunisians were more likely than religious Tunisians to support a return to authoritarianism. Fifty-two percent of those who pray five times per day said that democracy is preferable to a “leader with a strong hand,” compared with 41 percent of those who report praying less frequently.19 (In 2012, 78 percent of Tunisians said religion was “very important” in their lives, a full 63 percent of them reported praying five times per day, and 96 percent said they observe the Ramadan fast).20


“Our Big Trip to the Center”

As we saw with Turkey, in deeply divided societies where attitudes for and against Islamists harden, the center can’t hold. It makes more sense to consolidate your base and get your supporters to turn out en masse. To say that Ennahda’s electoral strategy failed, though, is to miss the point. Ennahda officials readily admit that moving to the center wasn’t necessarily meant to win them the election. It was something they believed they had to do regardless of the consequences. As Ounissi told me, “We’re not thinking about electoral strategy right now. It’s all about Tunisia. We made a choice. If that gets us second place, then I’m fine with that.” Or as Meherzia Laabidi put it, “Moving to the center has a cost, and the cost is losing part of our electorate.”

Some like Noureddine Arbaoui, one of Ennahda’s historic figures and chief ideologues, admitted that Ennahda’s laser-like focus on policy minutiae and technocratic grandstanding was largely aspirational. “If we want to be realistic, up until now, there isn’t voting for parties based on their actual programs,” he told me. “There isn’t one person who went to the ballot box and said this is a liberal program so I’m going to vote liberal. Our supporters voted for us because we’re Ennahda. The others voted for Nidaa Tounes because they’re Ennahda’s opponent.”21

For both better and worse, Ennahda had decided to carry the burden of Tunisia’s democratic transition. To the extent that we can speak of a Tunisian “model,” this is it: Islamists conceding their Islamism, because the alternative, which they saw all around them, was the collapse of democracy. They might have been paranoid, but they couldn’t afford to take the chance, especially not with Libya, Syria, and Yemen ablaze right next door. “Yes it’s true we made concessions but this wasn’t a loss for us,” Ghannouchi explained. “If we had held to our right to stay in government in 2013, the country would have been destroyed.”22

This wasn’t just rhetoric. “Our big trip to the center,” as Ghannouchi described it to me, had significant consequences for the organization.23 Since the start of the Arab Spring, Ennahda’s leaders had veered from one crisis to another, each time persuading their base to stand down from ideological and revolutionary demands. During the constitution-drafting process, the party backed down on three controversial clauses—on sharia, gender equality, and blasphemy.24 Ennahda’s parliamentary bloc had proposed including sharia as a “source among sources” of legislation.25 By the standards of most Arab countries, this was fairly innocuous. Islamists, by definition, believe that sharia (however one wishes to define it) has a role to play in public life, yet here was an Islamist party accepting a constitution without even a mere mention of it. This concession came despite the fact that Ennahda dominated the constituent assembly and that a more prominent role for religion was widely supported in Tunisian society. A 2014 Pew poll found that 53 percent of Tunisians believe that laws in Tunisia should “follow the values and principles of Islam,” while a full 30 percent went further, saying laws should “strictly follow the teachings of the Quran.”26 Riadh Chaibi, a prominent Ennahda figure who has since left the party, recalls working to persuade conservative activists that there wasn’t any particular need to include a sharia clause in the constitution: “It was challenging to convince them, and some responded with an anger, bordering on hate.”27

The party leadership, guided by Ghannouchi’s vision and charisma, stayed the course, directing considerable organizational resources to explaining why a focus on sharia would be needlessly divisive. Focused on keeping its own house in order, Ennahda paid less attention to explaining its positions to broader society, leading to confusion about Ennahda’s ultimate intentions. Similar challenges presented themselves when it came to revolutionary demands. In 2013, the proposed “exclusion law”—which would have barred thousands of Tunisians, including “all members of the successive Ben Ali governments, from 1987 to 2011, as well as all senior members of the former ruling party” from holding elected office—failed to pass by only one vote.28 To ensure the bill’s defeat, Ghannouchi expended his considerable political capital to get just enough Ennahda deputies to flip their votes at the last minute. Organizations have finite resources. The fact that so much of the party’s political capital was spent on resolving internal debates came at a cost.

Ennahda is an extreme example of the delicate balancing acts that Islamist movements perpetually find themselves in. These movements must demonstrate “moderation” to secular elites, international actors, and any number of other skeptics. Their conservative base, on the other hand, wants a dose of identity, ideology, and religion, and if not a dose than at least a nod to the movement’s “essence.” This endless balancing inevitably provokes an identity crisis. As one civil-society activist put it to me, “Ennahda aren’t like the others, but they’re not like themselves either.”29 In an April 2015 interview with a French journalist, Ghannouchi himself tiptoed that tightrope. He reiterated the standard Islamist opposition to blasphemy along with traditionalist views on gender equality and inheritance but expressed surprising tolerance toward homosexuality, arguing Islam has no role “to spy on folks.”30

How much of Ennahda’s moderation was “tactical” and how much of it reflected a genuine ideological evolution? As we saw earlier, Tunisia’s unique political context—the fragility of the transition and the distorting effects of repression—helps explain Ennahda’s trajectory of caution and compromise. That said, the interplay between belief and action is rarely straightforward. Obviously, belief inspires action, but saying and doing something enough times can end up shaping, and changing, what you believe in, even if you don’t quite realize it at first.

* * *

THE SUCCESSION OF COMPROMISES worried Sheikh Habib Ellouze, Ennahda’s most prominent “hard-liner.” In the 1980s, he had opposed the movement’s decision to change its name from the Islamic Tendency Movement to Ennahda. More than two decades later, Ellouze—as the self-styled guardian of the party’s Islamic identity—was fighting a similar battle. I met Ellouze for the first time in February 2013 on the margins of a tense parliamentary session. As one of the movement’s historic figures, he had grown old (he went blind in one eye during his thirteen years of solitary confinement), but he seemed as spry as a twenty-year-old. He spoke with the confidence of someone who believed that history was on his side. He dismissed the party’s move to the center as mere tactics. “There aren’t any of us who do not believe in the rulings of sharia,” he told me. “All of us believe in banning alcohol one day. What we disagree on is how best to present and express our Islamic ideas.”31

When I met with him again two years later, he wasn’t so sure. A lot had changed in the interim, and he seemed exhausted. He told me to meet him at the Ennahda headquarters, which took up nearly an entire block in the posh Montplaisir neighborhood. It was an odd choice of venue, I thought, considering he didn’t really fit in with the party’s “new look.” The mostly young staff buzzed around the headquarters in a uniform of sorts: black suit, white shirt, (relatively) skinny black tie. We might as well have been at a fashion shoot—the suits seemed unusually well tailored, with the pant legs narrow and tapered. Ellouze, on the other hand, wore the traditional jebba along with the chechia, a red felt hat. We sat down off to the side of a large conference room, but a few other people were speaking loudly, oblivious to the fact that the sheikh, one of the movement’s historic figures, was trying to give an interview. He asked the staff for a quiet room. After some negotiation, we moved to a tiny room on the top floor of the five-story building.

Ellouze, always loyal despite his disagreements, was, this time around, open and biting in his criticisms of the party. He had a list of grievances and detailed them one by one. First, Ennahda might as well have lost the elections on purpose, having run a vapid, uninspiring campaign replete with technocratic boilerplate. No matter how much you reach out to secularists, they’ll always doubt you, he said.32 But the disagreement over electoral tactics went deeper. He was worried about the younger party figures who grew up either in exile or outside the movement’s embrace. What begins as tactics, he told me, can quickly become internalized. At some point, if you say something over and over, you start to believe in it. No one, after all, likes to think they’re engaging in “double discourse” (something that Ennahda is routinely accused of by its opponents). To close the gap between what you say and do and what you believe, you may have to “shift” the latter. This, one might argue, is the essence of politics. (It can cut the other way, too, where “moderates” adopt a more conservative discourse because it’s good electoral politics and, over time, start believing their own rhetoric.)

The notion of Ennahda as an “exceptional”—and exceptionally progressive—Islamist party is one that many in the leadership have embraced, and this self-perception drives them to continue along the current path, despite the discontent it has stirred among their conservative base. I heard it over and over: “We are proud.” It feels good to prove the naysayers wrong, to demonstrate not just to skeptical secularists but also to the international community that “Islam and democracy can meet.”

Individuals also matter. Unlike other Islamist movements, which have generally lacked major thinkers or ideologues—Egypt’s Brotherhood hasn’t had one for decades—Rached Ghannouchi has articulated a distinctive vision for the party. Here, the divergence with the Turkish model, often seen as a major inspiration for Ennahda, becomes clear. The two parties share similar ideological origins—a milder, more secular-friendly version of the Brotherhood “school.” Erdogan, the skilled politician from the streets of Istanbul, had reembraced his religious roots, in part because it worked. Ghannouchi, the intellectual, was more interested in proving a point than in winning an election. But as the leader of the party, there were only so many elections you could lose before your followers started to wonder. As Ghannouchi’s biographer Azzam Tamimi, himself a prominent Islamist associated with Hamas, told me, “Ghannouchi ended up contradicting himself at times because he needs to think as an Islamic leader, but at the same time he needs to act as a politician. It’s always this tension between the two.”33

Indeed, while Ghannouchi’s vision may be distinctive in some respects, the results, when applied to everyday Tunisian politics, aren’t always consistent or clear. Was Ennahda a revolutionary or a reformist party (several prominent figures have left the party because it wasn’t enough of the former)? Is it government or opposition, or is it somehow both at the same time (as when it accepted a cabinet post)? Is Ennahda a movement or a party, or both (and if it is both simultaneously, is that sustainable)? And what, exactly, does it mean for a party to be a party with a religious “reference” when it insists on downplaying that religious reference?


Ennahda and the Problem of Islamist Exceptionalism

Tunisia, like Turkey, was a fascinating laboratory of what happens when decades of forced secularization come to an end. What did an Islamic revival look like in a secularized context? Ghannouchi’s project, one that he had staked his legacy on, was to change Islamism and perhaps even “Islam” (assuming the two were interrelated). It was a tempting notion, this idea that ideological divides could somehow be transcended by neutralizing them. One of Islamism’s greatest failures (or successes, depending on your perspective) was politicizing something—Islam—which had once, a long time ago, been a source of unity and consensus.

Ghannouchi’s friend and fellow traveler Abdel Moneim Abul Futouh had left Egypt’s Muslim Brotherhood in part for precisely this reason. Abul Futouh, during his insurgent campaign for president in 2012, had an interesting if counterintuitive call to arms. In an interview with a Salafi television channel, he declared: “Today, those who call themselves liberals or leftists, this is just a political name, but most of them understand and respect Islamic values. They support the sharia and are no longer against it.”34 Abul Futouh noted that all Muslims are, by definition, Salafi, in the sense that they are loyal to the Salaf, the earliest, most pious generations of Muslims. He seemed to be saying: We are all, in effect, Islamists, so why fight over it?

There were ample reasons to fight over it, of course. As much as Ennahda moderated, seeking the elusive center, it was still Ennahda. If Ennahda decided to throw in the towel and morph into a “liberal” party, then what would be the point? There were other liberal parties who were presumably better at being liberal than an Islamist party. Even Ghannouchi was more than willing to recognize this.35 If Ennahda ceased to carry the mantle, then someone else would come and fill the vacuum. As long as there was popular demand for an Islamically infused politics, someone would have to supply it.

But there was another problem. Ennahda could do and say all the right things, but the doubts would linger. It wasn’t something that party leaders had much control over. Secularists distrusted (or hated) Islamists not necessarily for what they did, but for who they were. Ennahda, inevitably, was going to be made up of conservative, practicing Muslims. Before and after major meetings, for instance, party leaders usually join together for prayer as a group. Islam is their starting point, even if the end point—the specific positions they advocate—may diverge considerably.

After I met with Ghannouchi, his assistant very kindly drove me to my next meeting. The assistant was a true believer, as he soon made clear. His approach to life seemed to be based on an overarching trust in the haraka, or movement, and the leadership of the sheikh, the honorific with which Ennahda members referred to Ghannouchi. The silence in the car was bothering me, so I tried to strike up a conversation. We soon found ourselves discussing whether someone who drank alcohol could join Ennahda. He didn’t think so, and pointed out that there were conditions for becoming a member of the party. Someone had to vouch for your moral character, a process known as tazkiya. It was also unlikely that anyone who drank would want to become a member in the first place—unless, perhaps, they hoped that joining Ennahda would help them kick the habit and become better Muslims.

In this sense, Ennahda, despite featuring all the trappings of a modern party, wasn’t quite that. It was more like a family. As the ex-Ennahda official Riadh Chaibi described it to me, “Leaving the party is almost like leaving your religion.”36 Ennahda, like most Islamist parties, is shumuli, roughly translated as “comprehensive” or “total.” Brotherhood-inspired organizations are first and foremost movements before parties, meant to encompass every facet of life. They offer religious education and organize charity work. Perhaps most important, they provide a sense of community—of belonging and brotherhood—at a time when societies threaten to tear apart. In contexts where the state is strong and society weak, they can fill the gap. In authoritarian contexts, they offer something additional and absolutely essential—financial, legal, and moral support for the families of activists who have been unjustly imprisoned.

Academics, understandably, have tended to focus on what Islamists do. Observable behavior is, well, easier to observe. You can measure it. It’s tangible. Focusing on who Islamists are, on the other hand, is difficult, since one can never truly know the hearts of men. That said, we can, in fact, talk in quite specific terms about what Islamist organizations are, rather than merely the outcomes they produce. The “encompassing” nature of Islamist parties is one of their underdiscussed yet critical distinguishing marks. Because these parties are more than just that—they are movements—membership takes on a weightier meaning. This is particularly the case with Brotherhood-inspired organizations, which generally have tiered membership structures. Ennahda, however, has been both a party and a movement in one, so to join the former is to be a part of the latter. Because of legal requirements governing licensed parties, this means that anyone can, in theory, become an Ennahda member. In practice, however, Ennahda, or any mass Islamist party for that matter, will stand apart for better or worse. Discussing the typical Ennahda member, Chaibi describes the dynamic: “He doesn’t consider himself part of the society; he thinks he’s better. This leads to love of self. He tends to think, ‘We are not merely partners … we are the conscience of the nation.’”

Implicitly, even the most progressive Ennahda figures believed they, as individuals, were different, not so much because of what they did, but because of who they were. One particular exchange with Noureddine Erbaoui was intriguing in this respect. A close associate of Ghannouchi, he was an enthusiastic supporter of the party’s “new look,” downplaying the importance of religion and recasting Ennahda as the country’s best technocrats. I asked him, when you talk about poverty reduction and putting people to work, why should anyone think that Ennahda would do a better job than any number of secular parties which have more economists in their ranks and more experience in government? “The program of Ennahda, the program of Nidaa Tounes, the programs of the others, they’re similar,” he admitted. “So, then, what makes me as a citizen vote for Ennahda? It’s like what Erdogan said, ‘We don’t steal.’” To illustrate the point, he offered an example of why people voted for Hamas over Fatah in the 2006 Palestinian elections:

When Hamas gets funding for job-creation programs, out of one hundred dinars, you know that ninety will go to people who deserve it. Ten dinars might get lost in some corruption. If you give the same hundred dinars to Fatah, ninety dinars will go to corruption, even though it’s roughly the same program.37

I imagine that Arbaoui thought this sounded appealing to Western audiences: If people were scared of Islamists, then there was no reason to be. They were just like secularists but better, because they were less corrupt. Even if this was true, it displayed an almost endearing naïveté—that it was enough for politicians to merely be honest and come up with good economic programs. The rest would flow from that. But, at a more basic level, Arbaoui’s comment, however innocuous it sounded, betrayed a belief that the religious commitments of Islamists made them not just better people but better politicians as well. It meant that Islamist parties, despite their best intentions, would never—and could never—be as “normal” as they said they wanted to be.

The tendency to stand apart isn’t necessarily a major problem during periods of stifling autocracy, but it becomes an issue when Islamists assume the responsibilities of government. In established democracies, ruling parties are generally open to opportunists and influence peddlers. But if you need to be of a certain religious or moral pedigree to enter the halls of power, then this can promote the perception of exclusion. And, in Tunisia and Egypt, during Ennahda’s and the Brotherhood’s brief stints in power, that perception spread among the non-Islamist opposition. The charge of “Brotherhoodization” of the state became a kind of call to arms. The claims were wildly exaggerated, but they were effective all the same, drawing on latent fears that Islamist groups were insular and impenetrable, valuing organizational self-preservation over all else. In any democracy, political parties appoint party members to senior positions, but it is much less common for a closed movement—a movement that transcends party—to appoint other members of the movement, who are bound together by a deeper loyalty.

* * *

THIS WAS WHAT MODERNIZATION looked like, and it was a bit of a mess. The premodern ideal of Islam as a unifying force had met the modern ideal of political party competition. Political parties and the nation-state were inextricably linked. There was a state, after all, that needed governing, and it was parties that competed for the privilege. The more powerful the state was, the more contentious the struggle for power. As brittle as it may have ultimately been, the modern Arab state, with overdeveloped bureaucracies and security sectors, was “strong,” dispensing patronage and providing employment to a disproportionately high number of dependent citizens.

The modern nation-state, in this sense, had no prior analogues, so there could be no prior models of reconciling Islam and the state. It was a dilemma with no obvious resolution. What was once a source of unity—an Islamic moral framework shared by all Muslims—was now the trademark of the one main “Islamic” party. That party, which came to be associated not just with Islamism but Islam, would then seek state power, further exacerbating political and ideological polarization. Ideology, party, and power were fused together in a potentially fatal embrace. Islamists themselves weren’t oblivious to the dilemmas. If you asked them, they would be the first to expound at length on the empowerment of local councils and the need to distribute power away from the state. In fact, in their various political platforms and electoral programs during the 2000s, Brotherhood organizations became enamored with “decentralization.”* But how did one implement an ambitious program of decentralization without first having control of a powerful, centralized state—the very state that would presumably be asked to self-limit its own jurisdiction?

A lopsided power imbalance between Islamists and secularists complicates matters further. Most Arab countries lack strong, coherent party structures, yet, during democratic openings, citizens are asked to practice politics through political parties, which are either weak or nonexistent. It can take years, if not decades, for new parties to build themselves up from scratch. Yet with “democracy”—and particularly elections—as an uncontested normative good, few democrats are willing to make the argument that elections, at least on the national level, should be shelved indefinitely. In both Egypt and Tunisia, Islamists didn’t have parties in the normal sense of the word. But as ideologically cohesive movements, they could easily “convert” themselves into parties, either by forming an affiliated party, as in Egypt, or by intertwining party and movement to the extent that they became indistinguishable, as in Tunisia. In their first ever free and fair parliamentary elections, Islamists (including Salafi parties) won nearly 75 percent of the seats in Egypt and 41 percent of the seats in Tunisia. The largest secular parties won only 7.6 percent and 13 percent, respectively, a massive landslide by any measure. At such an early, crucial stage, the results heightened fears that democracy would fundamentally disadvantage non-Islamists. While secular and liberal parties busied themselves playing catchup, Islamists would consolidate control over constitution, state, and parliament, making future reversals all the more difficult.

Liberals and secularists were disadvantaged in another, perhaps even more fundamental way. It wasn’t clear what “liberalism” really meant in the Egyptian or Tunisian contexts beyond a generalized dislike of Islamists. It was, in any case, mostly a minority orientation, the province of well-educated urban elites. Liberals didn’t have the binding organizational structures of Islamists. Or, to put it differently, liberalism wasn’t—and could never be—a way of life (it was about letting individuals choose their own way of life, whatever that happened to be, free from coercion). Because liberalism couldn’t offer an affirmative vision of what it meant, or why it mattered, for ordinary citizens, liberals had little choice but to fall back on virulent anti-Islamism. Where non-Islamist parties have done well in the Arab world, they have done so by building large coalitions of individuals, civil-society groups, and smaller parties, which agree on relatively little. To the extent they hold together, they do so by pointing to an enemy, whose very existence requires them to put their differences to the side, at least for the moment.

This leads to a dangerous, self-reinforcing dynamic. To justify their existence and to maintain internal cohesion in the absence of a coherent ideology, non-Islamist parties have powerful incentives to emphasize and deepen the Islamist-secular divide. In this sense, ideological and religious cleavages, once entrenched, can be very difficult to undo. In their classic 1967 study Party Systems and Voter Alignments, Seymour Lipset and Stein Rokkan argue that the process of state formation gives rise to differences among citizens, which provoke lasting cleavages.38 That economic cleavages are paramount in most Western democracies is no accident, given the particular sequencing of events in the modernization process. Here, parties play an important role. If a particular cleavage gains traction, then they have greater incentive to define themselves around that cleavage, since that’s how they distinguish themselves from the competition. The academic literature on political party development suggests that “parties themselves … are the main drivers behind party system change and stability.”39 Or, as the political scientist Nick Sitter puts it, “the parties have stolen the show.”40

Just as secularists benefitted from the Islamist-secular divide, so too, naturally, did Islamists. As we saw in previous chapters, Islamism is a modern construct that depends on the conscious affirmation of one’s Islamic identity. It would only make sense to assert your Islamic identity if it were being threatened by a competing sense of identity. If the role of Islam were neutralized—as Ghannouchi, Abul Futouh, and other “liberal” Islamists hoped it might—then Islamists would stand to lose their raison d’être. Perhaps that would be a positive outcome, but the incentives for Islamists are aligned in the opposite direction. Islam is the distinguishing mark that ensures the organizational cohesion and coherence of Islamism. From an electoral standpoint, religion is essential for rallying the base.

To hope that Islam might be neutralized was to hope that the problem—the problem at the core of the struggle for the postcaliphate order—might simply resolve itself. In any situation where ideology is a source of conflict, citizens becoming less ideological is certainly one solution. But is it realistic? To think that Islam can, once again, be a source of unity and consensus, as it was in the premodern period, is to succumb to utopian thinking. This is reflected, oddly enough, in the Middle East’s two most successful and democratic countries, Tunisia and Turkey. The legacy of secularization, even if it has dimmed somewhat, cannot be undone entirely. In both countries, there are secular elites, significant enough in number, who disagree with Islamists not just on the role Islam should play in public life but on whether it should play such a role in the first place. And, as we saw earlier, when Islamic fervor, a multiplicity of political parties, and a state strong enough to be worth “capturing” are all in the mix, ideological and religious polarization isn’t just likely; it is inevitable.

A prominent, even dominant, role for Islam and Islamists in the political life of the Middle East is not necessarily contrary to democracy (although it may be contrary to liberal democracy). Democracy, after all, is about reflecting popular sentiment in its various forms. Democracy is about letting different trends in society express their ideological preferences, regardless of whether or not we agree with them. Why should Turks, Tunisians, or Egyptians shun ideology as long as their ideological divides are real and meaningful? To paper over them or postpone their reckoning—as Ennahda has attempted—is better than the alternative, but it falls well short of a long-term resolution. If “democracy” can only succeed, or even come to be, through the marginalization of Islamists or by Islamists themselves conceding their Islamism, then this is a brittle democracy indeed.





