8. Islam, Liberalism, and the State: A Way Out?


On January 7, 2015, two masked gunmen carrying assault rifles and shouting “God is great” burst into the offices of Charlie Hebdo, a French satirical magazine known for its irreverent depictions of the Prophet Mohamed, and opened fire. The massacre left twelve dead, and made martyrs of cartoonists, prompting widespread calls for solidarity in the face of attacks on free speech. Two days later, the two gunmen Said and Cherif Kouachi, French Muslim brothers of Algerian descent, went down in a dramatic gunfight with police in a printing plant in an eastern suburb of Paris, where they had been holding a hostage.

The impressive and inspiring show of solidarity at France’s unity march on January 11—which brought together millions of people and more than forty world leaders—was not necessarily a sign of good things to come. “We are all one” was indeed a powerful message, but what did it really mean, underneath the noble sentiment that all people are essentially good and want the same things, regardless of religion or culture? Ten months later, the Islamic State carried out a series of coordinated attacks across Paris—at the Stade de France, Bataclan theater, and various cafés—killing 130. Even if the scope was limited to Western liberals, the aftermath of the attacks revealed a striking lack of consensus on a host of issues, including the limits of free speech, the treatment of religions versus racial groups, and the centrality of secularism to the liberal idea. Turns out, we are not all one.

French schoolteachers were reportedly dumbfounded that (some) Muslim students refused to stand up for a moment of silence after the Charlie Hebdo attacks.1 But this is where confusion seeped into the debate. Within France, there was not a cultural divide on the killings at Charlie Hebdo. To even suspect that a significant number of French Muslims might support the slaughter of innocents is troubling. However, beyond the killings themselves, there is, in fact, a cultural divide—one that shines light on some of the most problematic aspects of how we in the West talk about Islam, values, and violence.

For example, French Muslims are more likely than non-Muslims to view blasphemy as unacceptable. They are more likely to think that attacks on the Prophet Mohamed and the Quran should be criminalized as hate speech and incitement, much like denial of the Holocaust is. It was problematic, then, to view condemnation of the Paris killings and affirming the right to blaspheme as two sides of the same coin. For many Muslims, they weren’t. To treat them as a package deal was not only odd—after all, opposing murder and opposing blasphemy are quite different things—but also dangerous.

Polling data offers additional insight into what European Muslims think about the role of religion in private and public life. (I’ll focus here on French and British Muslims, two of the largest Muslim populations in Europe.) For starters, the baseline of religious observance varies considerably. According to the 2009 Gallup Coexist Index, 58 percent of French Muslims either “very strongly” or “extremely strongly” identify with their religion, compared with only 23 percent of the French public.2 The numbers for Britain are even starker: 75 percent versus 23 percent. Talk of a “clash of civilizations” is as unwise as it is imprecise, but there does appear to be a clash of values. Somewhat remarkably, 0 percent—yes, 0 percent—of British Muslims apparently believe homosexuality is morally acceptable. Among French Muslims, the proportion is much higher, at 35 percent, but that is still more than forty percentage points lower than the 78 percent of French people who say that homosexuality is morally acceptable.3

What about blasphemy? According to a 2006 Pew poll, 79 percent of French Muslims blamed the 2005 cartoon controversy—in which a Danish newspaper published various images of the Prophet Mohamed—on Western nations’ “disrespect for the Islamic religion,” while 67 percent of the general population blamed “Muslims’ intolerance.”4 Needless to say, this is a massive gap in perception.

Britain, meanwhile, has had a spirited debate over the role of communal sharia courts in adjudicating family law. In a controversial 2008 address, the Archbishop of Canterbury Rowan Williams argued that civil and religious law need not be mutually exclusive.5 In this sense, the question of sharia in the United Kingdom is not a theoretical one. According to a 2007 Policy Exchange survey, 28 percent of British Muslims said they would “prefer to live under sharia law.” The number shoots up to 37 percent among 16- to 24-year-olds.6 The question’s phrasing isn’t wholly satisfying since many Muslims might prefer a third alternative—a dualistic mix of secular and religious law—but, in any case, 28 percent is still a rather sizable minority. On a number of other issues, including female veiling, polygamy, apostasy, and whether Muslim women can marry non-Muslim men, the 16-to-24 category consistently emerges as the most enamored by strict interpretations of Islamic law. Apparently, youth and tolerant, liberal attitudes do not go hand in hand. The implication is that people who spent their formative years in Britain are more religiously conservative than their elders, despite being immersed in the British educational system rather than, say, the Pakistani or Egyptian ones.

* * *

SOMETHING IS HAPPENING, and as frightening and foreign as it may be, it isn’t necessarily a mystery. We live in an age of resurgent ideology, whether in Israel, where right-wing radicals increasingly hold sway, or in India, the world’s largest democracy, where Hindu nationalists claimed a landslide victory in the 2014 elections and, with it, the opportunity to govern alone for the first time in the history of the Indian republic. In the heart of Western democracy, meanwhile, unapologetically anti-Muslim forces—who seem intent on echoing Europe’s tragic past—gain ground, with their calls for an exclusivist nativism based on the imagined glories of better days. With the apparent weaknesses of neoliberalism and social democracy alike, many are searching for more meaningful politics beyond unfettered individualism. And seeking a deeper sense of belonging in one’s own community—whether that’s a sect, tribe, or nation—often means casting out those who aren’t quite the same.

This longing, if we can call it that, tends to take a different form in the Middle East and other Muslim-majority contexts. For societies that have suffered one tragedy after another, nostalgia offers an opportunity for escape. The memory of the last caliphate lingers. The citizens of countries such as Egypt, Jordan, and Pakistan are deeply conservative, with sizable majorities supporting the implementation of Islamic law to varying degrees.7 This, though, isn’t about religion in the narrow sense. Here, for better or worse, the call to Islam, and an idealized notion of sharia, evokes a more just, equitable order—something that has been in short supply for much of the modern era.

While it certainly helps, one doesn’t need to be a card-carrying Islamist to favor Islamist policies. There can be Islamism without Islamists. In Egypt, the brutally anti-Islamist regime of strongman Abdel Fattah al-Sissi employed “vice squads” in a national campaign against moral “perversions.”8 In Malaysia, an ostensibly secular government repeatedly upheld bans on non-Muslims using the word “Allah.”9 In short, even non-Islamists, if they want to win elections or strike up a populist pose, need to be responsive to the public mood, and that mood is often conservative. Meanwhile, countries such as Turkey and Tunisia that took a different path and tried to reengineer their societies in an explicitly secular mold could only muster fleeting success—at the high cost of subverting democracy for decades.

One of the main arguments of this book has been straightforward enough, although its implications are more messy and complex: Islam, for a variety of cultural, historical, and theological reasons, is distinctive in how it relates to politics. In chapter 2, we saw how analogues to the Reformation are symptoms of wishful thinking—and historically imprecise to boot. Not all peoples, cultures, and religions follow the same path to the same end point. We aren’t all the same, and why should we be?

With the implosion of the Middle East, the rise of the Islamic State, and the alienation of Muslim minority communities in Europe, many in the West have come to view the Middle East—and even Muslims more generally—as more trouble than they’re worth. The subtext of a great deal of post–Arab Spring commentary is not really about Islam and violence as much as it is about a deeper philosophical divergence. Impatience and exhaustion have replaced the euphoria of those faded days of Arab springtime, which have grown increasingly difficult to remember with any real clarity. For many, particularly in the more secular corners of Europe, there is a desire, and sometimes a demand, for Muslims to embrace liberalism and an anger that they simply won’t. Why can’t they just get their act together?

The conversations taking place about Muslims—much of the time without actual Muslims present—are variations on a distinctly post-9/11 narrative. With the Middle East’s intensifying violence, however, the discussions have managed to become even more problematic and paternalistic. The “Islamism is the problem” and “Islam needs a reformation” themes have become something of an epidemic, more often than not featuring an inability, or unwillingness, to understand how and why religion, in the broadest sense of the word, matters in the way that it does to so many in the Middle East.

After the attacks of September 11, 2001, the author Christopher Hitchens, essayist and critic Paul Berman, and others framed the war on terrorism as an existential struggle. They were enlisting their readers in a fight about something bigger—a fight over ideals and ideas. This wasn’t just about terrorism. It was about reasserting faith in Western liberalism and defending it against Islamist totalitarianism. The prose was romantic, too, befitting a new ideological struggle that would be waged on an epic scale. In reading the great political theorist Michael Walzer’s February 2015 meditation on Islamism and the left in the age of the Islamic State, I was reminded of Berman’s 2003 book Terror and Liberalism. I remember its stark, white cover. Even the title suggested a certain clarity. Walzer’s essay is a continuation of this sort of polemic, ending appropriately with a call to arms. “My friends and neighbors are not ready to enlist; many of them won’t acknowledge the dangers posed by Islamist zealotry,” he writes. “But there are dangers and the secular left needs defenders. So here I am, a writer, not a fighter, and the most helpful thing I can do is to join the ideological wars.”10

To the extent that there is such a war to be fought, it is one that we in the West can’t hope to win. (Perhaps polemics are needed, except that real people “don’t live polemically.”11) In the wake of the attacks on Charlie Hebdo, the French prime minister, Manuel Valls, declared war on “radical Islamism,” a difficult war to fight without a working definition of either “radical” or “Islamism.”12 Like Valls, Walzer never really defines Islamism, instead using the term rather expansively to include not just violent extremism but any kind of religious “zealotry.” He includes the Muslim Brotherhood founder Hassan al-Banna in his list of zealots, which suggests he considers the Brotherhood part of the same Islamist camp—including the likes of al-Qaeda and the Islamic State—that must be fought and defeated. On closer examination, it becomes clear that advocates of the “Islamism is the problem” line aren’t just opposing Islamists but the very idea of intertwining religion and politics, an idea that enjoys widespread appeal that goes well beyond Islamists. Even if Walzer’s struggle is right and just, it is almost ludicrously detached from Middle East realities. Forcing people to be liberal or secular, particularly when they don’t want to be, doesn’t tend to work well.

There are those who will view such arguments as culturally relativist—as examples of Western liberals reneging yet again on their liberalism. Walzer writes that “individual liberty, democracy, gender equality, and religious pluralism aren’t really Western values; they are universal values that first appeared in strong, modern versions in Western Europe and the Americas.”13 This is fine as far as it goes, but it raises a question: Why aren’t some “universal” values universally held? And, if they aren’t universally held, is it enough to insist that they should be?


The Persistence of Foundational Divides

One can hope that somehow—despite what I have argued in this book—Islam in decades or perhaps centuries will succumb, like other religions before it, to the appeals of secularization. My argument here is not that such an outcome is impossible but, rather, that it is improbable and extremely unlikely in the near to medium term.

The struggle for the postcaliphate order has persisted, in one form or another, since at least 1924. A resolution of the role of religion and state has proved elusive. But to say that Islam has not changed or adapted would be inaccurate. The idea of Islamism—a product of both modernity and secularism—would make little sense to early Muslims (why would Islam need an “ism” at the end of it anyway?). Islamists hoped to “modernize” Islam so that Islam could be made safe for the state and the state safe for Islam.

Frustratingly, however, the gap between Islamists and their opponents has not only persisted but also widened. The attempts to find some kind of modus vivendi have so far fallen short, in different ways and for different reasons. Islam—a religion and, for many, a way of life—and the nation-state have proved more difficult to reconcile than the early Islamic modernists we met earlier in the book would have ever imagined. It is not a heartening thought: This is what foundational divides look like after repeated efforts to address and even resolve them.

There is simply no reason to think that such foundational divides will dissipate on their own. They reflect, after all, fundamental differences over the most existential of questions—the role of religion, the nature of political allegiance (to a state or to a religious community), and the meaning of the nation. In Europe, these divides reached their final and definitive resolution as Christianity’s hold over Europeans weakened, giving way to something resembling a secular consensus. To be sure, conservative and evangelical Christians continued to advocate for religious values in public life. In Europe, they were a tiny, dwindling minority. In the United States, they were a larger minority, but one with a built-in ceiling of influence, and, in any case, they did not put forward—and, as I argued in chapter 2, could not put forward—a comprehensive legal-social project anchored in religion.

* * *

WHETHER THE ISLAMIST project—reconciling the premodern Islamic tradition with the modern tradition of the nation-state—can succeed remains an open question. The scholar of Islamic law Wael Hallaq takes issue with Islamists for precisely this reason, arguing that they have become obsessed with the modern state, to the extent of “taking [it] for granted and, in effect, as a timeless phenomenon.”14 A growing number of foreign-policy hands, including Henry Kissinger and Dennis Ross, have made the opposite case, arguing that Islamism, despite its versatility, is essentially incompatible with the Westphalian order. Ross, who served as a diplomat and advisor in the administrations of George H. W. Bush, Bill Clinton, and Barack Obama, writes that “what the Islamists all have in common is that they subordinate national identities to an Islamic identity.”15 To say that Egyptian national identity and “Islamic identity” can somehow be separated would be news, for one, to Egypt’s Sissi, a supposed “Islamic reformer” who has become an unlikely darling for what we might call “stability firsters.” Sissi, for instance, wrote in his U.S. Army War College thesis that “democracy cannot be understood in the Middle East without an understanding of the concept of El Kalafa [the caliphate].” The early caliphate, he went on, is “considered the ideal form of government and [is] widely recognized as the goal for any new form of government.”16 Eight years later, during his campaign for the presidency, Sissi claimed that a head of state’s job included “presenting God [correctly].”17 Meanwhile, other “moderate” U.S. allies, such as the Moroccan and Jordanian monarchies, are constitutionally endowed with religious legitimacy (the Moroccan king is amir al-mumineen, or “leader of the faithful”).

More problematically, though, Ross and Kissinger appear unaware of, or perhaps indifferent to, the state centrism of mainstream Islamists. (This can lead to broad and sometimes bizarre brushstrokes, as when Kissinger, in World Order, manages to lump together al-Qaeda, Hamas, Hezbollah, the Taliban, Iran, the Islamic State, and Hizb ut-Tahrir, all in the same sentence.18) Islamism, of the mainstream rather than extremist variety, has attempted to make peace with the state, hoping to reform and redirect it instead of destroying it in favor of some pan-Islamic caliphal fantasy. The Brotherhood never did revolution well for precisely this reason. It did slow, plodding gradualism. Even when it flirted with revolutionary action in the 1940s, a young, ambitious Gamal Abdel Nasser, who gave the oath of allegiance (baya‘a) to Hassan al-Banna, quickly grew disillusioned with the Brotherhood for prioritizing its own interests over that of the revolution.

These considerations make the movement to cast all Islamists as the problem—and to argue for constraining their political participation or even excluding them altogether—particularly dangerous. The demonization and marginalization of Islamists who have attempted to work within existing state structures threatens to radicalize them not so much toward terrorism but, rather, toward revolution against the state. This process has already begun and will only intensify in the absence of viable alternatives.

Across the region, the state, as it is currently imagined, is at the heart of the problem. The Arab world suffers from weak, failing, and failed states. But it also suffers from strong or “overdeveloped” states, to use Yezid Sayigh’s apt description.19 More than that, the Arab regional order suffers from the “exaltation” of the state—something most obvious, and frightening, in the case of Egypt, where President Sissi has enthusiastically promoted the sacralization of state power. This is the democrat’s dilemma: Security and stability would seem to depend on strong states, particularly in the short term, but the demands of pluralism and at least a semblance of democracy require ultimately constraining, and even weakening, those same states.


Islamism, Liberalism, and the State

To the extent that one accepts the nation-state as the only realistic option for political organization, mainstream Islamism’s state centrism is generally a good thing. Yet even if the Brotherhood and other Islamists are, or were, amenable to the Westphalian order, that didn’t necessarily mean the Westphalian order was amenable to them.

This leaves us at an impasse. The state-centric order in the Arab world, for all of its artificiality and arbitrariness, is preferable to ungoverned chaos and permanently contested borders. For the Westphalian system to survive in the region, Islam, and even Islamism, may be needed to legitimate it. To drive even the more participatory variants of Islamism out of the state system is to doom weak states and strong, brittle ones alike to a long, destructive cycle of civil conflict.

Since the demise of the Ottoman caliphate, the Middle East can claim more than ninety years of accumulated experience. Yet efforts to establish inclusive and consensual states and “normalize” the role of religion have all fallen short. Even in Turkey, with its more than sixty years of off-and-on democratic experience, the problem of religion and state persists, threatening to derail the country and its politics off course.

In the post–Arab Spring era, regimes, instead of working to minimize ideological polarization, refocused their efforts on marginalizing Islamist parties. Arab autocrats convinced themselves that past failures to crush Islamists were a result of not enough force, rather than too much. From a moral standpoint, trying to eradicate mass movements that are deeply entrenched in society is problematic, to put it mildly. But even if one were willing to put moral considerations completely to the side—as, sadly, too many have—it would still be a fool’s errand. After all, you can try to kill an organization, but killing an idea is a different matter. Decades of rather vigorous attempts should have made this more than apparent. In Tunisia, Libya, and Syria, Islamist organizational structures ceased to exist in any real sense after years, if not decades, of eradicationist policies. (In Hafez al-Assad’s Syria, mere membership in the Brotherhood was punishable by death.) With the democratic openings of 2011, however, Islamist movements reemerged as powerful, even dominant actors in all three countries.

* * *

IN AUGUST 2014, a young British Muslim named Faheem Hussain posted an 8,500-word essay on his blog, the modestly titled Some Thoughts.20 As a graduate student in philosophy, he seemed more interested in writing for himself and finding a space to tease out challenging philosophical dilemmas.

His essay, entitled “Egypt’s Liberal Coup,” was, more than anything else, a thought experiment. Hussain was interested in how ideas could have an almost autonomous power. Ideas, in this sense, were dangerous. No one, of course, would argue that ideas didn’t matter, but what about when they not only shaped but predetermined political outcomes, making political violence all but inevitable? In the piece, he questions whether Western liberals, in a mode of knowing self-righteousness, were right to condemn Egyptian liberals for their enthusiastic support of a coup against Egypt’s first democratically elected government. “What will concern us is to scrutinize philosophically whether a liberal justification for a military coup can be provided,” Hussain writes. In his search for answers, he travels the canon of Western liberal thought, from John Locke to John Rawls.

The tensions between liberalism and democracy are at the heart of Hussain’s inquiry. As I explored in my previous book, democracy and liberalism have generally gone hand in hand in the Western experience, to the extent that the two concepts became inseparable in the public imagination.21 This has led to quite a bit of analytic confusion. Liberalism is about a set of rights and liberties, including freedom of speech, conscience, and religion, with the ostensible aim of expanding individual autonomy and agency. The protection of such freedoms depends on the rule of law, drawing from constitutional principles that enshrine nonnegotiable rights.22

The word “nonnegotiable” points to the inherent tensions between constitutional liberalism and democracy. With certain rights built into the system from the very start, clear limits are imposed on what elected majorities can hope to do. In what are today the world’s most successful democracies, the foundations of constitutional liberalism preceded democracy, allowing the latter to flourish. As the scholars Richard Rose and Doh Chull Shin write, “Countries in the first wave [of democracy], such as Britain and Sweden, initially became modern states, establishing the rule of law, institutions of civil society and horizontal accountability to aristocratic parliaments.”23 Democracy, in the sense of political equality and universal suffrage, only came later, and even then only gradually.

There will always be a small minority, particularly in countries with stark class divisions, which argues that voting should be restricted to those who are literate and educated, just as various poll tests and taxes were used centuries ago to screen out the poor, blacks, and even Catholics.24 But there is little risk of such restrictions being imposed. Even otherwise autocratic countries pay lip service to “democracy” and hold regular elections (even if the Great Leader wins 98 percent of the vote). With democracy having become such an uncontested normative good, the sequencing of the past—liberalism first, democracy later—is simply not replicable. Imagine telling a Tunisian or an Egyptian, just after unseating a dictator of thirty years, that they needed to be patient and to work on establishing the foundations of constitutional liberalism before they could vote in a new president. The fact that citizens, at least in the early glow of revolution, demand—and expect—new elections is undoubtedly a good thing, but, like all good things, it comes at a cost. Getting democracy “backward” has led to the rise of “illiberal democracies,” a notion that has long been both implicit and explicit in centuries of political theory and that was popularized by Fareed Zakaria in his 2003 book The Future of Freedom: Illiberal Democracy at Home and Abroad.

Democracy and liberalism are both inherent goods, as most Americans would argue. In recent American history, we run into cases where democracy (as expressed through the results of elections) and liberalism (as constitutionally guaranteed rights) come into conflict. What if a state legislature votes to restrict the right of two men or two women to express their love for each other in the way that they see fit? Should state institutions be compelled to provide abortion services for women who freely make the choice, with their own bodies, to end a pregnancy after a certain period of time has passed? In some European countries, the tensions are even starker. In France, for example, that the state actively blocks women from wearing a piece of clothing—and denying them employment if they refuse—would seem to be a particularly blatant violation of individual autonomy and free expression. It is also a violation of freedom of religion and conscience. Most of these women are wearing the head scarf not on a whim but because they believe it to be an obligation commanded by God. Yet this is what the French people, as expressed through their representatives, have voted for, and because the French constitution enshrines a militant secularism, no superior court—and France already features weaker judicial review than the United States—is likely to overturn such a law.

I have chosen somewhat loaded language in phrasing these dilemmas of law and choice, because that is precisely what they are—dilemmas. When two goods come into conflict, one has to make a choice. In established democracies, where citizens reach some level of consensus over shared norms, the stakes are high but usually not too high. In a fragile country in transition—and one already deeply polarized over questions of stateness—the very existence of democracy is called into question, provoking wholesale repression, mass killings, and perhaps even civil war. This is what happened in Egypt. Democracy is always a good thing in theory but not necessarily in practice, and it is Egyptians, and not anyone else, who have to live with the consequences of large numbers of people exercising their right to vote.

The Islamists who won five consecutive elections—two referenda, two parliamentary contests, and one presidential poll—were not radicals bent on imposing some entirely new social order (if they had been, they probably wouldn’t have kept on winning). There are numerous reasons why many Egyptians grew tired with the Muslim Brotherhood—a deteriorating economy and perceptions of growing insecurity and “chaos”—but, for secular elites and even not-so-secular elites such as Sissi and other top military brass, the overriding, existential concern revolved around the nature of the Egyptian state.

* * *

A FEW DAYS AFTER the first post-Mubarak parliamentary elections concluded in January 2012, I remember visiting my great aunt in her extravagant flat, tucked off to the side of the presidential palace in the tree-lined streets of the Cairo suburb of Heliopolis. Her place of residence—her life, really—felt a bit surreal against the backdrop of a dirty, chaotic city that always seemed on the verge of imploding in a cacophony of noise and fury. The apartment, which I had fond memories of from when I was young, was brimming with antique furniture, fine art, and the smell of something delicious being cooked up by a flurry of servants.

This time around, she was in a state of shock and confusion. She wanted to hear what I thought. It was one thing for the Brotherhood to win close to 40 percent, but how could 28 percent of her countrymen vote for ultraconservative Salafi parties? Like most Egyptians, she personally knew Brotherhood members even if she didn’t quite like them, but she hadn’t had much experience with Salafis and seemed totally unaware that, in the final years of the Mubarak era, they had extended their reach deep into Egyptian society. She might as well have been in mourning—and, in a way, she was. She mourned not only for what she feared Egypt might become, but for a country that she could no longer recognize, a country that was no longer really hers.

It raised the question: Was it worth it? For liberals like my great aunt, it apparently wasn’t. It was easy, after the military reassumed control of the country, to dismiss people like her as liberals in name only. In a powerful, prescient piece after the July 2013 coup, the then literary editor of The New Republic, Leon Wieseltier, wrote that Cairo, once “the capital of Arab hope,” had become “the capital of Arab despair.” Perhaps more interestingly, he wrote that it was “time to stop calling these people liberals.”25 How could real liberals support a military dictator, enthusiastically joining his personality cult no less? A fair question. But, as Faheem Hussain points out, there is a long history of liberals striking Faustian bargains to protect hard-won liberties from the uncouth, and presumably all too pious, masses. “Enlightenment philosophes,” writes Hussain, “were prepared to make a spoken or unspoken agreement with authoritarian interests, promising obedience and loyalty as long as core liberal values such as freedom of expression over private beliefs were maintained, at least those opinions that wouldn’t trouble the security of the state.” It makes sense, then, to compare Arab liberals not to Western liberals today but to liberals during a comparable period in Western history, when the choice between liberal values and mass democracy was starker. Hussain goes on, “As the philosophes did before them, Egyptian liberals find themselves within societies that have religious majorities who view liberal ideas as at best religiously problematic, or at worst foreign or infidel.”26

Yet, as much as liberals might fear Islamist rule, this doesn’t necessarily mean that they are secular. Most wouldn’t identify as such, particularly in a country like Egypt where “secularism” is associated with lack of religious commitment and even atheism (for similar reasons, some liberals avoid self-identifying as liberals).27 All the major liberal parties support—or at least say they support—article 2 of the constitution, which states that the principles of sharia are the primary source of legislation. This would, of course, be anathema to American and European liberals, but, again, it makes little sense to understand Egyptian liberals in anything but their own religious and social context.

Western liberals in the early Enlightenment were products of their own context. Published in 1689, John Locke’s A Letter Concerning Toleration is a classic of the Western Enlightenment canon, and it certainly counted as “liberal,” even radically so, in its own time and place. But, as might be expected of anyone who came of age in the seventeenth century, Locke’s toleration had its limits. He viewed atheists and Catholics (if they refused to renounce papal authority) as dangerously subversive. Since they did not share the same loyalties to God and country, they were to be cast outside the fold of political community. As he saw it, the trust deficit was simply too large. No ruler can tolerate a church whose followers “ipso facto deliver themselves up to the protection and service of another prince.” Atheists, meanwhile, were simply beyond the pale. “Those are not at all to be tolerated who deny the being of a God,” Locke writes. “Promises, covenants, and others, which are the bonds of human society, can have no hold upon an atheist.”28

Similarly, James Madison—one of the “founding fathers” and lead drafter of the Bill of Rights—wouldn’t be considered a liberal by today’s standards, considering that he owned hundreds of slaves over the course of his life. Unlike many of his contemporaries, Madison never freed any of his slaves, even upon his death.29 Yet as Hussain writes, “to reject his liberal credentials for this would be absurd as Madison is acknowledged as one of the preeminent liberal theorists, just as absurd as it would be to deny that owning another person as ‘property’ thereby denying them ‘inalienable rights’ could be considered anything other than illiberal.”30

One might also consider different versions of the same person and how his or her views evolve over time. If, for instance, we judged the President Obama of 2008 according to today’s standards of mainstream liberalism on, say, gay marriage, then his liberal credentials would be very much in doubt. This, however, would have limited utility, since at that time the vast majority of Democrats did not yet support gay marriage. To put it differently, holding (some) illiberal views does not necessarily disqualify someone from being a liberal. Again, one must take context—time and place—into account.

With this in mind, it would be fair to call at least some Egyptian liberals “liberals,” however much we might abhor their reneging on prior democratic commitments. Moreover, from the standpoint of rational self-interest, their decision to side with the military rather than let the democratic process play out is understandable and even justifiable on liberal terms. It was the most sensitive period of the transition, that early phase when decisions over elections, constitution drafting, and institution building take on outsized meaning and have lasting consequences. This is the problem of “path dependence”—the notion that the longer a certain path is followed the more difficult it becomes to change course. That the Muslim Brotherhood and Salafi parties successfully pushed for a transitional process that played to their strengths made their future entrenchment more likely. The incredibly lopsided results of the first parliamentary elections—with Islamists winning nearly three-quarters of the seats and the two major liberal parties winning only around 9 percent each—drove home the reality that liberals were at a severe disadvantage in any electoral competition. For groups that lack a clear ideology and preexisting social networks and organizational structures, building viable political parties is no easy task, taking years or even decades. Who knew how dominant the Brotherhood—and God forbid, the Salafis—would be by then? The state was the prize, and it was a prize that the Islamists would “win” if given the chance—if someone didn’t stop them. The worst-case scenario, which, as many liberals saw it, was also the most likely, was that Egypt—as a state, an identity, and a nation—would be altered irrevocably. The changes would be permanent and, as Hussain puts it, the dream of “a potentially liberal Egypt” would be doomed, perhaps for a lifetime and possibly longer.31

For the few willing to suspend their alarmism, the best-case scenario wasn’t nearly as bad, but it wasn’t exactly great, either. Even if Islamists started losing, the very fact of democratization would still be a problem. To the extent that Egyptians were illiberal, any elected government was likely to reflect that illiberalism to at least some degree. Even liberal parties would have to learn the language of religion if they wanted to win outside major urban centers. Democratization, then, does something very simple—it closes the gap between government and mass sentiment, and in a center-right country this effectively skews the entire political system rightward. Islamism, in this sense, doesn’t necessarily require Islamists (whereas liberalism generally requires liberals).

As the only case where Islamists have won consecutive elections (and managed to stay in power), Turkey’s recent experience with democracy looms large. There was a time when the AKP seemed like a model for a kinder, gentler Islamism that liberals could learn to live with. But in the light of Erdogan’s illiberal turn, Arab liberals look at Turkey and see their fears vindicated. With secular parties weak, disorganized, and lacking anything resembling a coherent message, it becomes difficult to envision how the AKP could lose an election anytime soon. Even in the June 2015 parliamentary elections, the AKP—after alienating everyone but its own base, grappling with Erdogan’s authoritarian tendencies, and presiding over a sputtering economy, as well as epic foreign policy failures—still managed to win 47 percent of the seats. (The party was able to essentially win back what it lost in snap elections just five months later.)

Turkey’s shift toward illiberalism reinforced secularist fears, including in Tunisia, over Islamists’ ultimate intentions. Regardless of what Islamists do, and even if they demonstrate “good” behavior, there will be a significant subsection of society that will see them as existential threats. That they may seem “moderate” today only makes them more threatening, because they are hiding who they really are. In this vein, liberals feared Morsi and the Brotherhood not necessarily for what they had done, but for what they might do in the future. Needless to say, it is difficult to have a rational debate about something that hasn’t actually happened yet.

Even when Islamists aren’t the problem, they are the problem. Even when they make historic compromises, as in Tunisia, they still provoke antidemocratic behavior on the part of a powerful array of domestic, regional, and international actors. The goal, then, must be to build in guarantees for those who wish to derail democracy out of fear of what it might bring. In other words, it is the region’s most antidemocratic actors—who contrary to popular belief aren’t Islamists but secularists—who must be catered to and reassured. Admittedly, this shifts the burden onto Islamist parties, which might sound like the political equivalent of blaming the victim. But politics isn’t a morality play, and it certainly isn’t fair. For at least the short to medium term, Islamists will need to temper their ambitions and restrain themselves in the quest for power. But that can only take you so far. The only long-term solution is to find a place for Islam, in its varied political forms, within the democratic process.

* * *

IT IS DIFFICULT TO imagine it now, but continental Europe struggled with foundational divides—with periodic warnings of civil war—as recently as the 1950s. Belgium, Switzerland, Austria, and the Netherlands were divided into ideologically opposed subcultures, sometimes called “spiritual families” or “pillars.” These countries became models of “consensual democracy,” where the subcultures agreed to share power through creative political arrangements.

If we have learned anything, though, it is that lessons learned in Europe are not easily applied to the Middle East. Consensual democracy works best when there are multiple centers of power in society, none of which is strong enough to dominate on its own. While this more or less holds true in Lebanon, and even then precariously, it is not applicable in much of the region. In the countries we’ve focused on—Egypt, Turkey, and to a lesser extent Tunisia—the perception that Islamists are too strong and secularists too weak makes polarization significantly worse than it might otherwise be.

In continental Europe, the lines were also drawn more clearly. In Belgium, for instance, there were distinct groups of Flemish and Walloon that could be plainly identified. Our three country cases, however, are relatively homogenous. More homogeneity is almost always viewed as a positive factor in forging national identity, but it can also have its drawbacks. Islamists and non-Islamists are different, but not different enough. They live in the same cities, go to the same schools, visit each other on holidays, and sit together at family dinners. This can make it better. It can also make it worse.

Despite this surface-level homogeneity, the underlying principles of consensual democracy—that power should be shared, dispersed, and restrained—can still be useful. A “pure” parliamentary system with only a ceremonial president could have helped alter Egypt’s course. But this is not what Egypt had. From independence onward, the Egyptian president had always been a towering figure in the country’s politics, casting a shadow on everything else. As the first elected civilian president, Morsi was, in fact, weaker than all of his predecessors, yet he still enjoyed disproportionate powers in Egypt’s centralized, top-heavy system. Not surprisingly, then, he became a lightning rod for the opposition. The fact that presidential contests are all or nothing—only one person, after all, can win—further heightened the existential tenor of political competition. These dynamics allowed the military to capitalize on the anger that had coalesced around the person of President Morsi.

A parliamentary system, on the other hand, would have put power in the hands of a strong prime minister, who could have much more easily been replaced—without necessitating a rejection of the democratic process Egyptians had agreed to less than a year earlier. Early elections and no-confidence votes are regular features of parliamentary democracy.32 Presidents, however, are generally difficult to impeach, requiring voters to wait four years or longer to express their buyers’ remorse. Despite their claims to the contrary, presidents invariably represent one party—their own. A prime minister, on the other hand, is more likely to govern in coalition with other parties, making him accountable to a larger number of stakeholders. All other things being equal, parliamentary systems also make coups against elected leaders less likely. Of course, coups can and will still happen, but, even when they do, parliamentarism offers a clearer way out. Ousted parties can more easily reconstitute themselves in parliamentary systems, as Turkey’s recurring cycle of military intervention followed by Islamist success suggests.

Political design can only take you so far, however. At some point, parties and politicians must work in good faith to lower the political stakes. There are any number of creative possibilities. Parties, for example, can agree to “postpone” debates on the divisive issues that are likely to fracture the unsteady, diverse coalitions that toppled the authoritarian regimes in the first place. This, though, is anathema to how we like to think of democracy’s development. After thirty years of Hosni Mubarak’s rule, it was only natural to expect Egyptians to want to debate anything and everything among themselves; discussions over the role of religion had been suppressed for far too long. But by instituting an “interim period” before contending with the most divisive issues, democratic competition could be regularized—both sides could, potentially, gain enough trust in each other. Of course, the ideological polarization—over perennial touchstones like alcohol consumption, sex segregation, women’s rights, and educational curricula—would inevitably come. It was only a question of whether, when it did, Egyptians would be better equipped to work through the polarization peacefully, without recourse to violence. Here, as ever, the rule of thumb is not to assume the end of ideology or some kind of natural moderation process. Rather, we should assume foundational divides as a constant, then work around them to limit their negative effects.


The Liberal Veto and Its Limits

One way to address foundational divides is to build “liberal vetoes” into the political system from the beginning. The most effective way to do this is through permanent guarantees in a constitution. The U.S. Bill of Rights is, in this sense, a towering achievement, imposing clear limits on the desires of the majority. If members of Congress wanted to issue legislation prohibiting Muslims from holding cabinet positions, for instance, they wouldn’t be able to, however large their majority. The constitution wouldn’t allow it. But this raises its own set of difficult questions. After a revolution, who gets to write the constitution?

There are three possibilities. Historically, elite commissions and committees often drafted constitutions, the most notable example being the United States in 1787. The postwar Japanese constitution, meanwhile, was commissioned by General Douglas MacArthur and drafted by “approximately two dozen Americans during Japan’s postwar occupation, with relatively minor revisions made by Japanese government officials and virtually no public consultation,” writes Alicia Bannon.33 When Corazon Aquino led the Philippines’ democratic transition in the 1980s, she appointed a fifty-member commission that drafted a constitution that continues to govern the Philippines to this day. Such top-down approaches have generally fallen out of favor.

Today, the most common approach, adopted by both Tunisia and Egypt in 2011, is to do it democratically. Tunisia directly elected a parliament that doubled as a constituent assembly, while in Egypt, the elected parliament selected the hundred men and women whose sole job was to draft a new constitution. This is the most obvious—and, I would argue, fair—approach. To the extent that societies should be able to chart their own course, why shouldn’t the population have a say on the basic framework of their political system-to-be? To shut ordinary citizens out is to undermine the legitimacy of any constitutional document, particularly in polarized societies where one group is likely to dominate any appointed body to the exclusion of others. There is simply no way to achieve “fair” representation except through some kind of democratic selection process (which is precisely why we have democracy in the first place). To appoint, rather than elect, a committee also raises the question of who, exactly, is doing the appointing. If a constitutional committee is largely made up of old-regime elites, for example, it can taint the process from the very beginning.

Tunisia’s and Egypt’s constitution-drafting processes reflected the international consensus around the need for popular participation and buy in. A democratic constitution, writes Vivien Hart, an expert on how constitutions transform conflict, “is no longer simply one that establishes democratic governance.” Rather, “it is also a constitution that is made in a democratic process.”34 Hart concludes that “participatory constitution making is backed by an international norm and an emerging legal right,” based on an increasingly expansive understanding of the United Nation’s Declaration of Human Rights.35

The democratic approach to constitution drafting, however, is problematic for the same reasons that democracy is problematic—it can lead to illiberal outcomes in societies where large numbers of citizens, perhaps even a majority of the population, espouse illiberal beliefs and attitudes. If Egypt had directly elected its constituent assembly, close to 75 percent of the members would have been Islamist. As it turned out, “only” 50 percent were—nearly 25 percent less than their actual electoral weight would have suggested. But while Islamists may have seen this as a concession, liberals, rightly, saw the constituent assembly as what it still was: an Islamist-dominated body.

In her study of Kenya’s constitution-drafting process in the early 2000s, Bannon labels the presumed need for broad participation “the participation myth”—certain conditions can, in fact, “make broad participation either helpful or undesirable in light of an individual country’s circumstances.”36 While also citing negative experiences in Nicaragua and Chad, Bannon argues that the broadly participatory process in Kenya was not only expensive, in terms of “expense, time, and opportunity cost,” but also divisive, leading to “ethnic pandering and polarization.”37

Lastly, instituting a democratic selection process while, at the same time, agreeing on a limited number of “supraconstitutional principles” is a third path. Islamists and secularists, however, are unlikely to agree on nonnegotiables. (If they could, then the ideological divide wouldn’t be nearly as large as it currently is.) In the end, something—or someone—has to give. Either Islamists voluntarily concede some of their preferences, agreeing for example to include only mild Islamic language, or a supreme body, perhaps one where Islamists are underrepresented, must formulate something resembling a “bill of rights” binding on all participants.

This third way would loosely mirror the constitution-drafting process in postapartheid South Africa. Nelson Mandela’s African National Congress initially wanted to elect a constituent assembly to draft the constitution but gave in to the concerns of F. W. de Klerk’s National Party, which feared a new constitution would not adequately protect the white population. In 1993, twenty-six parties negotiated a set of supraconstitutional principles, similar to the U.S. Bill of Rights, before directly electing a constituent assembly.38 Mandela and de Klerk soon shared the Nobel Peace Prize.

Practicality aside, the South African model—in part because we know, after the fact, that it was successful—sounds appealing. I should include a major caveat here, however. As a “small-d” democrat, I am deeply uncomfortable with nondemocratic solutions that circumscribe self-determination. Democracy is about representing and reflecting the popular will, and to limit or subvert that on something as fundamental as a constitution sets a troubling precedent. Why shouldn’t Egyptians, Jordanians, or Turks have the right to try out an alternative ideological project outside the confines of liberal democracy, however much we might disagree with it? That should be their choice, not anyone else’s. However, that conversation is moot if democracy fails to take hold in the first place. A democratic approach to constitution drafting in Egypt ended up fueling polarization and pushed liberals to consider extralegal regime change. If we wish to prioritize the survival of democracy in hostile conditions, then some things, at least in the short term, will need to be prioritized over others. These are necessary evils.

This means that, during any constitution-drafting process, Islamists will have to exhibit self-restraint and agree to postpone ideological objectives. If they are unwilling to do so, liberal supraconstitutional principles, per the South African model, will need to be enacted—imposed, really—before the drafting process begins. Islamists would no doubt protest any such arrangement as “unfair,” and they would be right. Liberalism is only neutral to those who are already liberals.39 As the literary theorist and legal scholar Stanley Fish argues, “It cannot be a criticism of a political theory or of the regime it entails that it is unfair. Of course it is. The only real question is whether the unfairness is the one we want.”40

But if a liberal veto is an evil, however necessary, it need not be permanent. Even robust liberal vetoes can be overridden, so there will still be opportunities in the future—after a democratic transition passes through its most vulnerable phase—for countries to experiment with more explicitly religious policies, if enough citizens decide that’s what they would like to do. This basic premise applies even in the world’s liberal democracies, which are not necessarily immune to bouts of illiberalism. It is only really a question of how high the majoritarian bar is. In the United States, two-thirds of Congress and 75 percent of the states can amend or repeal provisions in the Bill of Rights. For example, they could theoretically pass a constitutional amendment banning abortion. In countries like Egypt, Tunisia, and Turkey, where alcohol is currently legal and relatively easy to find, the issue of alcohol consumption is a touchstone for endless “what if” questions. Yet Prohibition happened in the United States, with large majorities in the Senate and House of Representatives as well as forty-six of forty-eight states backing the Eighteenth Amendment (of course, banning alcohol in the United States wasn’t justified on primarily religious grounds, while in Muslim-majority countries, prohibition is seen as fulfilling an explicitly Quranic directive).

As the votes on Prohibition demonstrate, the majority, if it’s large enough, can supersede the liberal veto. In this sense, built-in constraints and constitutional guarantees aren’t enough, on their own, to limit illiberal outcomes. American liberalism depends, more fundamentally, on the electoral distribution of the population. There simply aren’t enough far-right Christian evangelicals to change the nature of the state, assuming they would even want to. The vast majority of Americans are liberals (in the classical sense), and basic liberal norms are deeply entrenched in American political culture. Liberalism, then, needs liberals to survive and prosper. What, though, about countries where the electoral distribution of the population is lopsided in the other direction?

* * *

THE FOUNDATIONAL DIVIDES that I have focused on over the course of this book are as real and organic as they could possibly be. They are genuine, deeply felt, and revolve around “big” issues. But they are also new and manufactured. It is possible to be both at the same time. Polarization is inevitable when Islam ceases to be, as it once was, a source of unity and solidarity and becomes instead the province of one particular party. Parties compete for state power, and when the state is strong and overdeveloped, it raises the stakes considerably, fueling an endless cycle of polarization.

The three mainstream “models” of reconciling religion and state—the traditional Brotherhood model, the AKP model in Turkey, and the Ennahda model in Tunisia—all have their drawbacks, as we have seen. Turkey, at least from an Islamist perspective, has been the most successful of the three, insofar as Islamists have been able to fend off coup attempts and stay in power for a significant period of time. Turkey had advantages, however, that most Arab countries lack. As a NATO power and regional leader in its own right, Turkey was less susceptible to outside attempts to derail the democratic process. Turkey benefitted tremendously from the prospect of EU accession, which provided a major constraint on antidemocratic domestic actors such as the military. Yet Turkey also confirms what many already suspected: Islamist participation in the democratic process, even in the best of circumstances, is inherently polarizing and destabilizing.

It is ironic that we’ve come to this. For decades, Western observers encouraged Islamists to embrace the democratic process. This meant deemphasizing their strictly religious origins and practicing politics through newly established political parties. The goal, after all, was to transform a religious movement into something more “normal”—something that could better fit the contest for power inherent to the modern nation-state.

At first, Islamists were reluctant, but they were quick learners, realizing soon enough that as the largest movements in their respective countries, they, by the sheer force of numbers, would be the primary beneficiaries of the expansion of electoral democracy. Across the region, they formed political arms, establishing some degree of functional separation between movement and party. They not only came to terms with elections; they came to see elections as a necessary—sometimes the only—means of large-scale political change. In this sense, Islamists, like nearly everyone else, were products of a post–Cold War euphoria, and rightfully so. For all its faults, this was the best way to push for gradual political change. There weren’t any viable alternatives. Or, to put it differently, Islamists had lost the ability to think beyond the very things—namely party, state, and democracy—that they had initially doubted.

The gap between Islam and democracy, and even Islamism and democracy, appeared to be closing. This was the promise of a new era, where anything could be resolved through peaceful participation and democratic commitment, just as long as there was enough of it. But with the advent of the Arab Spring, a few things became clear: Islamists didn’t go well together with democracy, not so much because of what they did, but because of the fears they provoked and the polarization they fueled. Even in the best of circumstances—when they made one compromise after another—the divisiveness remained. The problem was that the polarizing effects of participation were built in to the Islamist project. Religion—the metaphysical rather than the material—was the fault line at the very heart of the new Middle East.

It is possible to hope, and to wait. But even if the arc of history bends, it doesn’t necessarily bend in the right direction, whatever that may be. It doesn’t necessarily bend toward liberalism or toward some imagined end of ideology where parties decide to content themselves with fights over the intricacies of economic platforms.

In Europe, the conclusion of the continent’s wars of religion only truly came after Christianity’s slow drift into the shadows of politics. There was nothing left to fight for, because there weren’t enough people willing to fight for it. In this sense, secularization offered a solution for weary European nations: It diminished the stakes, making politics less fraught and dangerous. When substantive divides did reemerge—with the rise of communists or, later, far-right populists and neofascists—the democracy that had been forged over decades was strong enough to withstand the pressure.

If Islam is, in fact, distinctive in how it relates to politics and if a reformation is not in the cards—or if it’s already happened—then the foundational divides that have torn the Middle East apart will persist, and for a long time to come. People dislike, fear, and even hate each other for legitimate reasons. As we have seen, the problem of religion and state has no easy resolution. It has been nearly a century since the demise of the last caliphate, yet the struggle has only intensified. The very project—political Islam—that proposed a resolution to the divide has only exacerbated it. They did what they were supposed to do, but perhaps too well. The more Islamists came to terms with democracy, political parties, and the nation-state, the more they found themselves rejected and repressed. It might as well be the region’s motto: Be careful what you wish for.

The hope, then, might need to be modest. Egyptians, Tunisians, and Turks—and many others—will continue to see the world in fundamentally different ways and want fundamentally different things, and that’s fine as far as it goes. But they will need to agree, however reluctantly, to do so through the untidy, inconclusive give-and-take of politics. This will, at least initially, prove both messy and destabilizing. But the postcaliphate order will have only truly begun when something inclusive, legitimate, and lasting takes root. For that to happen, the democratic process must play out for a long enough period so that Islam, Islamism, and democracy can evolve in a natural, uncontrived fashion.

Islamist movements, for their part, may need to unlearn some of the last several decades of checkered democratic experience. Elections are a means, not an end. And in the West, we’ve generally gotten it backward; the problem with most Islamists isn’t their opposition to the modern nation-state but, rather, their obsession with it. That obsession has worked against them, producing the opposite of what they intended—even more instability and division and over powerful states ripe for authoritarian capture. There was a time when Islamists saw society, rather than the state, as the engine of social transformation. The legacy of a failed Arab Spring and a new “caliphate” called the Islamic State will likely be this: forcing them, and perhaps us as well, to reimagine the nature of political change.





