5. The Turkish Model: Islamists Empowered


I walked up to the palace gates. This was Turkey’s so-called Ak Saray, or White Palace. I had a meeting with Ibrahim Kalin, President Erdogan’s chief advisor. The White Palace had become a headache for Erdogan and his Islamist-rooted Justice and Development Party (AKP). Built on more than two million square feet of protected forest land outside Ankara, the $600 million complex looked more like an Ottoman Versailles than the residence of a leader who came of age in Turkey’s working-class heartland and who has often marketed himself as a man of the people.1 The palace was met with outrage when it was unveiled in late 2014. Opposition parties complained that it had been built without proper court permission and shamed Erdogan’s decadence in a nation that suffers from a 10 percent unemployment rate.

At the gates of the palace, I showed the guard my American passport. The guard offered a raised eyebrow and a quizzical look. “Pennsylvania?” he asked, his voice dripping with skepticism. It had never occurred to me that being born and raised in Pennsylvania would be a liability in Turkey of all places. But Turkey had changed, as Erdogan put his considerable charisma in the service of reshaping the very state that had once imprisoned him. The political environment had grown tense, and Erdogan increasingly saw his opponents not as mere adversaries but as enemies. One of those enemies was a cleric and erstwhile ally by the name of Fethullah Gulen. Gulen was living in exile in Lancaster, Pennsylvania, about an hour from my hometown of Bryn Mawr. In the progovernment press, Lancaster—better known as the home of the Amish—had become the Center of the Conspiracy.

If there was in fact a conspiracy, a palace as fortress-like as this one was only appropriate. As its name suggested, the White Palace was grand, massive, overbearing even, a monument to Recep Tayyip Erdogan’s seemingly endless ambition. The question that grabbed me, and the one I hoped to answer here, was what exactly that ambition was for.

Founded in 2001, the AKP emerged from the ashes of a string of Islamist parties—the National Order (1970–71), National Salvation (1972–81), Welfare (1983–98), and Virtue (1998–2001) parties—each of which was banned and dissolved by the judiciary for “antisecular” activities. To avoid running afoul of the constitution, which enshrined secularism as one of its “irrevocable principles,” the various Islamist parties downplayed their Islamism and attempted to moderate their rhetoric and policies. Such a delicate dance could sometimes prove too delicate. Their raison d’être, after all, was an embrace of Turkey’s Islamic identity, but even something as mild as that could be interpreted as violating the principles of the Turkish republic.

Modern Turkey was founded by Mustafa Kemal Ataturk after the abolition of the Ottoman caliphate in 1924. Ataturk—an adopted name meaning “father of the Turks”—was the prototypical authoritarian modernizer, harnessing the power of the state to reengineer Turkish society. Others, including Tunisia’s Habib Bourguiba, tried to replicate his model, but no one managed to take it quite as far.

Ataturk saw Islamic cultural norms—and the legacy of Ottoman rule—as dangerous obstacles to his program of rapid modernization. They therefore had to be discarded. What followed was one of the most successful models of cultural and social engineering of the modern era. This included altering basic patterns of social interaction between men and women by encouraging mixed-gender interaction (Ottoman custom had put a premium on separation). Women were prohibited from wearing the face veil, while men could face jail time for wearing the traditional fez hat. Sharia courts were abolished. As part of his reforms, Ataturk ended the use of Arabic script, replacing it with the Latin alphabet, requiring a generation of Turks to learn an entirely new writing system from scratch. Arabic and Persian loan words were replaced by Turkish words. In short, Ottoman Turkish ceased to be.

Turkey’s militant secularism survived Ataturk, with the military and judicial establishment settling into the role of protectors of the state, standing guard over its secular foundations. In 1960, Turkey had its first coup, and in 1997 it had its last, with two in between, in 1971 and 1980.

Not surprisingly, the Islamists, led by a German-educated engineer named Necmettin Erbakan, found themselves restricted, excluded, and limited in what they could hope to accomplish. Various center-right governments reopened mosques, legalized the Arabic call to prayer, and lifted some restrictions on religious expression, but in other ways the situation for Islamists only got worse. After the 1980 military coup, the head scarf, though it was always discouraged, was formally banned—in universities, schools, hospitals, and state institutions—for the first time. Several attempts in the 1980s to lift the head-scarf ban proved unsuccessful. In 1989 and 1991, Turkey’s Higher Education Council lifted the ban, only to have their decision annulled by the Constitutional Court.2 In the 1989 annulment, the court ruled that the wearing of the head scarf, which “lacks a modern appearance,” was “increasingly becoming widespread and this is unacceptable in terms of the principles of secularism.”3 Even as the courts upheld the ban, it was inconsistently applied throughout the 1980s and early 1990s. It was only after Erbakan was ousted in the 1997 coup that the Turkish military enforced a uniform ban on head scarves in state institutions, including universities.4

As rural migrants flocked to the cities in the 1970s, they brought with them village customs and conservative Islamic practices. They were a natural constituency for Islamist mobilization, which started in earnest with the 1970 founding of the National Order Party. Erbakan and his cofounders reimagined Turkish history as a glorious Islamic Ottoman past that had been subverted by foreign influence. For them, the tanzimat reforms were the beginning of the downfall that reached a climax with Ataturk’s de-Islamization of society. When National Order was banned in 1971, the National Salvation Party (NSP) was founded in its stead the following year. Alarmed by a growing leftist movement, the military demonstrated some tolerance toward Islamism, and over the next eight years, the NSP made modest gains in elections and played an increasingly influential role in parliament, until it was crushed after the 1980 coup.5 Like its predecessor, NSP found its base among Turkey’s rural and industrialized poor. NSP and its successors were informed by what Jenny White calls Erbakan’s “vision of a form of modernization that was authentically Turkish and based on Muslim ethics.”6

The Islamic revival of the 1970s and ’80s heightened tensions with the secular establishment, as more women began wearing the head scarf. The economic power of Turkey’s Muslim middle class—a counterelite of devout small and medium business owners—skyrocketed. But despite the party bans (or perhaps because of them), Erbakan was able to expand his base of support, increasing his share of the vote with each successive election. Erbakan nurtured the image of the outsider victimized by a state that had, for too long, neglected the silent majority of pious, traditional Turks in the Anatolian heartland. His message was clear enough: The identity and the fitra of the Turkish people had been denied. And Islam, both as a cultural orientation and a religious tradition, was at the center of this uniquely Turkish identity. In this reading, one could not be truly Turkish without acknowledging the debt to the Ottoman caliphate, which, as one of the world’s great empires, remained a great source of pride as well as nostalgia.

The “Islamic project” in Turkey can only be understood in the context of an acute sense of loss. What it once meant to be Turkish would never be regained. Too much had happened in the interim. Turks could no longer read Arabic, the language of the Quran. Secularism, even if it was resisted and failed to take hold in rural areas, was now part of the social fabric. Norms and customs could and would evolve, as we will soon see, but a legacy of secularism was embedded, with generations having grown up with a very particular sense of what it meant to be a Turkish citizen. The visage of Ataturk was on every banknote, his statue in every city, and his portrait in every classroom. Short of a full-scale revolution, these realities could not be undone, at least not entirely.

* * *

TURKISH ISLAMISTS, LIKE THEIR counterparts in the rest of the region, were gradualists. Even in the darker days of repression, after any number of coups or party bans, revolution never figured into their discourse. While the military suspended democratic politics for periods of time, the multiparty system was never abolished altogether. And so the Islamic movement would wait, reorganize, establish a new party if the previous one had been banned, and try their hand in the next election. Before the 1983 general elections, Erbakan founded the Welfare Party, winning a mere 5 percent of the vote. After steadily increasing its vote totals in 1987 and 1991, Welfare claimed a plurality of the vote in 1996. For the first time in Turkish history, an Islamist party had won a national election. Erbakan, after thirty years of political attrition, would become Turkey’s first Islamist prime minister as part of a coalition government. But what should have been a time of celebration became instead yet another instance of the secular establishment’s inability to come to terms with Islamist participation. Erbakan was forced out of office in the “soft coup” of 1997, and, not too long after that, Welfare was banned. In its decision dissolving the party, Turkey’s Constitutional Court cited Erbakan’s own statements, including one where he said democracy was “not an end but a means.”7

There are only so many times a party—effectively the same party—can be banned before members begin to consider other approaches. And this is where Erbakan’s loyal student, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, comes into the picture. The mayor of Istanbul from 1994 to 1998, Erdogan was barred from political life for five years and spent four months in prison for reciting a religiously charged poem during a fiery speech in his wife’s hometown of Siirt, a conservative, blue-collar city in southeastern Turkey.8 The lines in question were: “The mosques are our barracks / the domes our helmets / the minarets our bayonets / and the believers our soldiers.”9 This was Erdogan at his best: rallying his base and playing the outsider. It was a brilliant move, nurturing Erdogan’s sense—and that of his supporters—of victimhood. The Kemalist establishment, the so-called “deep state,” had overreached, arresting a popular mayor who could now claim, with more cause than ever, that he was the underdog representing the pious masses in their struggle against an entrenched elite and a tyrannical state.


A Problem of State

A rapidly modernizing state cannot help being exclusionary. Ataturk wouldn’t have been able to increase literacy from around 8 percent to 20 percent in the span of just a few years by being tolerant and pluralistic.10 His reforms, as wide-ranging and pervasive as they were, required the centralization of power and decision making. They required a singularity of vision, and they required force. Most ordinary Turks did not share Ataturk’s vision, at least not at first. To the extent that Ataturk hoped to alter the very basis of what it meant to be “Turkish,” he would need to be unforgiving and relentless. In this sense, the demands of state building, which required the accumulation of authority, and the demands of democratization, which required the balancing and distribution of power, were in conflict.

A Turkish nation and a Turkish national identity did not exist under the Ottoman caliphate. Instead of the “individual” or the “citizen”—a modern invention—Ottoman subjects were governed by the rules, regulations, and norms of whatever religious group, or millet, they happened to be a part of. Each millet had its own leaders and court systems. The head of each millet, say, a rabbi or an Orthodox patriarch, enjoyed considerable powers, including collecting taxes, arbitrating disputes between individuals, and enforcing the community’s religious laws.11 Ottoman subjects of minority faiths were answerable not to the caliph but to their own local religious leaders who, in turn, were answerable to the caliph. The exchange was autonomy in return for loyalty.

With the decline of the Ottoman Empire, the millet system weakened, soon collapsing altogether. In its place, Ataturk’s task was to shift the entire basis of political community. Making “Turks” out of Ottoman subjects required the pretense of homogeneity, that there were common characteristics binding all citizens, irrespective of religious or ethnic background. And so very real differences—Turkey, for example, has large Kurdish and Alevi populations—had to be papered over, ignored, or suppressed. To be a Kurd before a Turk was to challenge the entire edifice on which the new Turkey was being built. Islamism, similarly, offered an alternative conception of identity. If the state was synonymous with secularism, then Islamists were, by definition, a threat. Through their very existence, they served as a constant reminder of the gap between a resolutely secular state and a society where Islam remained a natural, organic part of everyday life. These Islamic identities, because they challenged the state, were invariably politicized by both sides of the divide, one hoping to control and suppress and the other adopting Islam as its language of opposition.

As in so many Middle Eastern countries, the “secularism” of Ataturk and other autocrats had little respect for the separation of mosque and state. If religious leaders and communities were separate and autonomous, then they would have the ability to challenge state authority. To privatize religion and diminish its relevance in public life, it would have to be made subservient to the state. Where appropriate, the state would use religion not for religion’s sake but for its own. And so what followed was one of the most systematic projects of state regulation of religious practice anywhere in the Muslim world, one that would become a model for other Middle Eastern states.

Turkey’s Directorate of Religious Affairs, or Diyanet, is a massive bureaucratic entity whose budget exceeds most other cabinet ministries, including both the Foreign and Interior Ministries. Diyanet staff has doubled since the AKP came to power in 2002, and its annual budget has increased fourfold.12 The Diyanet trains imams, administers mosques and religious schools, and oversees Friday sermons. Until 2006, the Diyanet generated sermons from its headquarters in Ankara, where committees would meet monthly to determine content and draft sermons that were subsequently published on the directorate’s Web site and in its monthly magazine. In June 2006, sermon production was transferred to the provincial mufti offices, over which the Diyanet maintains oversight.13 The stated mission of the Diyanet—“to enlighten society on religion”—is inherently interventionist.14 This is a degree of state involvement in religion that would be unthinkable to most Americans. Imagine a senior U.S. official saying it was the federal government’s job to “enlighten society on religion,” or try to imagine a Department of Religious Affairs approving Sunday sermons in every single licensed church in the country. This, then, is secularism not in the sense of separation of religion from politics but in the sense of affirming the supremacy of the state and ensuring that religion does not obstruct the state’s prerogatives.


Learning to Love the State

Needless to say, the Turkish state’s insistence on French-style secularism, or laïcité, rather than the neutrality of the American model of state-church relations, was a constant source of anger and alienation for Islamists. But, then again, so many things about the Turkish state—and its militantly secular bureaucratic arms—angered and alienated. The grievances accumulated, coming to a head in the 1997 coup. But instead of confronting the state head-on, Turkish Islamists opted instead for the long game, whittling away at secular dominance little by little.

Repression is often assumed to have a radicalizing effect on Islamist movements. This is in some ways intuitive—bad behavior produces more of the same. Under certain conditions, however, political exclusion can actually have a moderating effect on Islamist actors. As I have argued elsewhere, a resurgent authoritarianism in Egypt and Jordan pushed the Muslim Brotherhood to deemphasize their Islamism, moderate their rhetoric, and move to the center in a bid to stave off political isolation.15 Strengthening alliances with non-Islamist actors offers a layer of protection against regime repression. After all, it’s more difficult to repress Islamists the more diverse and expansive their support. In Turkey, a similar dynamic was at play, with each party ban forcing Islamists to regroup and rethink. With each new round of repression, the goal was simple enough: avoid getting closed down the next time around.

The 1997 removal of Erbakan was the first of the country’s coups that specifically targeted an Islamist party in power, so it’s no surprise that it had a profound impact on a new generation of Islamists. The so-called “February 28 process”—named after the date of the military’s intervention—went well beyond a change in government, aiming to deal a decisive blow against the broader Islamic movement in every facet of public life, particularly in the educational sphere. The military issued an eighteen-point plan that shut down religious imam hatip schools and extended compulsory primary education—which pushes the state’s secular doctrine—from five to eight years. State institutions were purged of overtly devout officials. Thousands of Islamists faced water cannons and police batons as they protested the closure of imam hatip schools, which were perceived to be breeding grounds for future Islamist enemies of the secular state.16 The extent of the assault on Islamic networks was unprecedented. They would learn their lesson. As careful as they already had been, they would need to be even more cautious, steering well clear of any perceived red lines, lest the regime’s sword of Damocles fall once again.

After the Welfare Party’s successor, the Virtue Party, was also banned, Erdogan, Abdullah Gul, and their group of upstarts parted ways with Erbakan and founded a new party that defined itself not as Islamic but as “conservative democratic.” After a landslide victory in the 2002 elections, Turkey’s economic transformation began in earnest. AKP leaders pledged their fealty to Ataturk’s memory (which must have been difficult for them) and presented themselves as faithful proponents of the republic’s secular principles. They highlighted their relative youth, juxtaposed against Erbakan’s unusually long political career spanning four decades. A 2003 New York Times Magazine profile of Erdogan noted the AKP’s younger party members referred to Erbakan’s men as “the Politburo.”17 Talk of Islam was pushed to the side, but perhaps most important, AKP leaders offered a decisive break from Erbakan’s anti-Western, Euroskeptic rhetoric and embraced EU membership as a core objective. Meanwhile, as much as they disliked Israel, they knew they had to accept the realities of the regional system, particularly as they worked to deepen ties with European partners.

They had an unimpeachable democratic mandate, which was renewed and broadened with successive elections. But this didn’t bring the security they craved, as it might have in a normal democracy. Turkey wasn’t a normal democracy. Every day, AKP officials woke up wondering if the army or the courts would move against them. To preempt such an outcome, they demonstrated an impressive singularity of vision. The Virtue Party had been banned in part because of its spirited defense of the right to wear the head scarf. For the AKP, resolving the long-standing head-scarf issue—a key demand of its conservative base—would have to wait. They were playing the long game, and, this time, they would play it to perfection. This meant keeping a razor-sharp focus on a taxing EU accession process, which required jumping over a seemingly endless number of hurdles.

Oddly enough, the EU was a godsend for a party that, in its previous incarnations, steeped itself in anti-Western posturing. The EU accession process was a classic—and particularly successful example—of “positive conditionality.”18 The prospect of joining the EU provided structured incentives for the AKP to pursue far-reaching liberal reforms, including revising the penal code, easing restrictions on freedom of expression, expanding rights for the Kurdish minority, and reining in the military. The last of these changes would prove the most important. In the name of democratization, the military would have to respect the elected civilian authorities. EU membership, then, became AKP’s most important cudgel against the Kemalist “deep state.”

During this period of self-restraint, the question was often posed: What did Turkey’s Islamists really want? Were they engaging in “double discourse,” hiding their intentions, and waiting for the right moment to strike? And, if so, how planned and premeditated was their strategy of defanging the military and then—and only then—refocusing on issues of identity and religion?

With the military establishment sufficiently weakened by the late 2000s and the Constitutional Court effectively neutralized by 2010, the AKP began to veer to the right on religious issues, adopting a policy of what I term “soft Islamization.” When we think of Islamists and Islamization, a harsh, unforgiving picture of legislating morality usually comes to mind. At the more extreme end of things, we think about hudud punishments like stoning adulterers and cutting off the hands of thieves. But Islamization can be—and often is—much more subtle than that. Turkish Islamists may have been Islamists, but they were also Turks, the products of a massively successful nation-building project. And, like everyone else, they were products of a secularized society, whether or not they wished to be. Naturally, as a mass movement that prided itself on reflecting the popular will, the AKP practiced a distinctly Turkish brand of Islamism. As observant Muslims, they of course held the Prophet in the highest regard, but their golden age was to be found not in the seventh century but in the sixteenth, during the glory days of the Ottoman Empire.

* * *

IN A TURKISH CONTEXT, it wouldn’t have made much sense to speak about the “implementation of sharia,” which in a more conservative country like Egypt was a fairly standard and somewhat innocuous thing to say. Instead, the goal was first to “correct” the excesses of forced secularization by opening up political and economic space for religious Turks. Then, rather than imposing rules through legislative fiat, the leaders of the AKP hoped to incentivize religious behavior by, for example, increasing taxes on alcohol and providing financial stipends to young couples who married early (an effort to increase birth rates, but also presumably to discourage premarital sex). Some of it was more rhetoric than anything else, such as when Erdogan remarked that “there is no difference in killing the fetus in a mother’s womb or killing a person after birth.”19 Yet, however much abortion bothered him, Erdogan didn’t attempt to initiate new legislation restricting it. This was Erdogan acting in his “spiritual leader” mode, sharing his own views about the virtuous life without actually doing anything about it. As one senior AKP official put it to me, “Erdogan at times behaves like a father. Not everything that he says is a law. It is a suggestion. It is also to protect young people from bad things.”20

While Erdogan’s efforts shouldn’t be overstated, the basic trajectory was clear enough. Erdogan and the AKP hoped to harness the enormous power of the Turkish state to promote a particular conception of the good. Erdogan would speak often about raising “a pious generation” of Turks.21 The state would be the engine of change by expanding the role of religious secondary schools, Islamizing the Diyanet’s preaching and outreach, and offering more elective religious courses in public schools. At the personnel level, showing outward signs of piety in the state bureaucracy was once frowned upon. The opposite was now true. As long as the AKP stayed in power, demonstrating religiosity could help with career advancement.

In one sense, using the state to establish a new “normal” was radical. It meant undoing the militant secularism that had been at the foundation of the Turkish republic since Ataturk rose to power after the First World War. But in another sense, it wasn’t particularly original or creative and accepted without question some of the same problematic assumptions of Kemalism. Here, yet again, was a preoccupation with the Turkish state as the embodiment of the national will. In the early days of AKP rule, Erdogan would emphasize the need for “state neutrality toward all religions and doctrines.”22 This led Turkish Islamists to identify with American secularism as opposed to a more aggressive French-style secularism. But one objection to their otherwise preferred American “model” had to do with the role of the state. As the Turkish political scientist Ahmet Kuru notes: “The main reason [AKP parliamentarians] did not have a desire to take the American model entirely is their statist view on state-religion relations, particularly concerning the status of the [Diyanet]. These politicians have claimed that the state’s coordination of religious services through the Diyanet has been necessary to maintain Islamic services efficiently and to avoid anarchy in Islamic communities.”23

For decades, the institutions of the Turkish state tended to see Turks as children in need of a strong guiding hand. Such avid paternalism was sometimes expressed through amusing metaphors. Cevik Bir, one of the generals behind the 1997 coup, had a line he would repeat to skeptical foreign audiences: “In Turkey we have a marriage of Islam and democracy. The child of this marriage is secularism. Now, this child gets sick from time to time. The Turkish Armed Forces is the doctor which saves the child. Depending on how sick the kid is, we administer the necessary medicine to make sure the child recuperates.”24 (Notably, under Erdogan, many of the top military officers involved in prior coups were jailed, including Bir.)25 The state was detached and inaccessible. At the same time, it was to be loved and adored. Turkish authorities promoted the idea of devlet baba, or “father state,” which, in a simple enough phrase, captured the mix of paternalism and patriarchy at the heart of state-society relations. Until 2013, children would start their day at school with a pledge of allegiance: “I love my country more than myself.… I offer my existence to the Turkish nation as a gift.”26 The state, rather than religion, was something to die for, reflecting a sort of secular “martyrdom” with Turkey assuming the pose of the omniscient deity.

Every AKP leader has their own story of being excluded by their own state. When they refused to suppress who they were, there was a price to pay. For the AKP figures who were both Islamist and Kurdish, the sense of exclusion was multiplied. One such official, Mazhar Bagli, had briefly lived in Canada as a graduate student to conduct research on multiculturalism. He clearly hadn’t used his English much since then and would occasionally pause to ponder the appropriate choice of words during our interview. “There was a lot of pressure in Turkey coming from the military, on how to behave in society and within the family,” he reflected. “You had to speak a certain way, behave a certain way. The main aim of the Turkish state is to design our life, at all times. The oppression was felt not only by Muslims, but by Kurds as well.”27 Bagli described being stopped by the police during his university days simply for listening to Kurdish music.

However, just because AKP leaders had been traumatized by the state didn’t necessarily mean that they wanted to cut the state down to size. Without skipping a beat, Bagli would move from castigating the state to seeing state power as the solution to the problem. “Policies came from the deep state. Now the state, government, and society are hand in hand, walking in the same direction,” he told me. The problem, then, wasn’t state power per se but what it was used for. If it could be used for bad, it could just as easily be used for good. As long as state power was legitimated by the democratic process and was used to promote, rather than hinder, Islam, then there was little to complain about. “Before Mr. Erdogan was president, [presidents] were elected by parliament. Mr. Erdogan was elected by the people and also his power is coming from God. He is a more powerful person now,” Bagli explained.

This was the only system that the leaders of the AKP really knew, and its features were drilled into them from the very beginning, in school and at the workplace. Every public building, and often every room, had a portrait or bust of Ataturk, as did many homes. The gaze of the Turkish state, embodied in his visage, was inescapable. For Erdogan, as much as he may have hated it, it was the system he had willingly joined and then embraced, first as mayor of Turkey’s largest city, then as prime minister, and finally as president. Erdogan had never lived anywhere but here. He spoke no other languages. He wasn’t known to be much of a thinker, and, if anything, he had a mean anti-intellectual streak. This wasn’t someone who was about to question the basic structures of the modern state, and why should he? He had a distinctive vision for Turkish society, one based on resuscitating Turkey’s Ottoman past and returning to the Turkish fitra of Islam. Just as the Kemalist state, in its quest to reengineer society, had created an image of the ideal Turkish man, the state under Erdogan’s leadership wished to create its own (very different) ideal of the pious Turkish citizen. What the state had built could only be unbuilt by that same state. There was simply no other way—at least not an obvious one—to do what they wanted to do. The ends dictated the means.

The state would remain in its role of guardian and protector. On this, there was little doubt. Erdogan himself was quite explicit. In late 2013, controversy erupted after Erdogan said he would instruct governors to segregate mixed-gender dormitories. His reasoning was straightforward. “Mothers and fathers cry out, asking ‘where is the state?’” he explained. “These steps are taken to tell them that the state is here.”28


Islamism versus Authoritarianism

Some accused Turkey’s Islamists of being mirror images of their secularist abusers. This was true but only up to a point. The old days of government opponents being executed, assassinated, or “disappeared” by the security apparatus were no more. As one Turkish journalist wryly told me, at least there were now free elections “and they don’t kill people. Let’s give them that.” Turkey scholar Howard Eissenstat, otherwise quite critical of the AKP’s post-2010 turn, warns against the easy resort to nostalgia. “During the late 1990s,” he writes, “disappearances were commonplace and police stations were the sites of grotesque torture with bastinado and electrocution, which could last for days or weeks. Romanticism about ‘the good old days’ when the military acted as a guiding hand behind Turkish politics is ill-placed.”29 Yardstick measures of authoritarianism corroborate Eissenstat’s sentiment: Turkey dipped from a combined score of 3 in 2011’s Freedom House rankings to a 3.5 in 2015, a classification of “partly free” (1 is most free; 7 is least free). But that’s still a significant improvement from the mid-1990s, when Turkey scored a 5.30

When it came to Erdogan’s authoritarian tendencies, the more interesting question was why he had them. Was Erdogan really just interested in power and simply using religion to rally his base and consolidate authority? Or was it the other way around? Determining a person’s motives, of course, is a challenge. Political actors try to rationalize what they do after the fact, and they’re likely to superimpose “moral” reasons for doing immoral things. One is reminded of the verse from the Book of Titus: “To the pure, all things are pure” (1:15). At first, a politician may do something cynically and even admit his cynicism (if not to others then at least to himself), but for the self-proclaimed moralist, this is unsustainable. He must come to believe that what he is doing is right.

For many analysts, the temptation is to deemphasize religion and explain the behavior of Turkish Islamists through “normal” politics: It might have had an Islamic flavor, but, underneath the surface affectations, this was authoritarianism plain and simple. Erdogan is like Chavez is like Putin. As Claire Sadar writes, “A review of the party’s political legacy and current initiatives reveals a government that is more interested in expanding its power than spreading Islamist ideology.”31 Meanwhile, one of the leading scholars of modern Turkey, Jenny White, sees Erdogan as the latest in a long line of Turkish “bigmen.” A bigman’s position of leadership, she writes, is “acquired and augmented as he achieves status by being particularly good at provisioning and protecting his increasing numbers of followers.… Getting elected in Turkey involves the nationwide distribution of favors and amassing of obligations.”32 In a polarized society, being the bigman isn’t necessarily conducive to promoting a pluralism of parties or ideas. It requires the steady accumulation of power and the will to subvert potential competitors.

Erdogan was, indeed, a product of a distinctively Turkish authoritarian—and statist—political culture and tradition. How could it be otherwise? Mainstream Islamists are mainstream because they don’t—and can’t, it seems—diverge radically from their social context. As much as they hope to change what’s around them, they find themselves changed in the process. So Erdogan might be a “bigman,” but that still leaves the question of why unanswered. White is closer to the mark when she notes that “Turkish society is characterized by exceptionally low levels of interpersonal trust and a pervasive, often antagonistic, ‘us versus them’ ethos between groups.”33 The us-versus-them dynamic, however, cannot be reduced to a war over patronage or distribution. It is also about something deeper, and therefore the battle takes on an existential edge. One would have thought that over fifty years of democratic experience would have reduced polarization and grown the political “center.” Yet this hasn’t happened: Foundational divides over the role of religion and the purpose of the state remain unresolved. In any country’s politics, state power is a prize to be sought. But in cases like Turkey’s, power is more fervently contested than it might otherwise be because more is at stake. Since the state is so powerful, it can be used to reshape the individual and reengineer society.


The Purpose of Power

To think that power is sought simply for its own sake, for megalomania or ego, oversimplifies the complex emotional tenor of modern-day Islamist politics. One way, of course, to get a better sense of why the AKP has chosen a particular course is to talk to party officials and advisors, bearing in mind that there may be an incentive to either overemphasize or deemphasize the role of religion as a motivating factor. With this in mind, let me return to where I began this chapter, at the gloriously extravagant White Palace. I was meeting with Ibrahim Kalin, chief advisor to Erdogan and sometimes described as the president’s right-hand man. Kalin has been called a major player in Erdogan’s “shadow” government, playing a critical role behind the scenes.34 After defending Turkey’s opposition to the Egyptian coup in a tweet, he became associated with Turkey’s ongoing shift from a “zero problems with neighbors” approach to what he called a “precious loneliness”—or Turkey’s choice to preserve its “meritorious position” from the poor choices of some of its troublesome Middle Eastern neighbors.35 Kalin cut a most unlikely figure beside the brash, populist Erdogan. Previously a professor of Islamic philosophy at Georgetown University, he was bookish, soft-spoken, and self-deprecating. In our conversation that day, he seemed to be in dialogue not just with me but with himself as well, measuring his words, occasionally losing himself in thought, and expounding on the intricacies of premodern Islamic philosophy and history.

He seemed flustered by the constant criticisms, including, I suppose, from people like me. Alcohol consumption, one of the traditional Islamist-secular flashpoints, had become a kind of Rorschach test. Changing alcohol-related regulations played on the fears of secularists, who worried that seemingly minor changes—such as prohibiting late-night sales after 10 P.M. and banning sales in the vicinity of mosques or schools—symbolized a longer-term transformational project. Kalin was baffled by all the negative media attention. He said Turkey had taken an “average” and “measured” approach, combining permissive country models with more restrictive ones, like that of the United States. He went on:

There was a very surprising reaction that this is another attempt to Islamize the country and this is “banning alcohol” and “you are discouraging alcohol!” And I’m like, have you ever seen a government in the world that encourages people to use alcohol? Of course we encourage people not to use alcohol.

Kalin pointed to what he called a double standard: “When Britain introduces a law like that, it is considered protecting the public interest. When we introduce it, it is Islamization.”36

This, however, is where intent may prove more important than actual policy outcomes. When Britain’s Labor Party restricts the sale of alcohol, they’re doing so for presumably secular reasons having to do with the public welfare. When an Islamist party does it, it’s more complicated, with officials using both secular and religious justifications. And because Islamists don’t necessarily see the sacred and the secular as separate categories, the two become blurred together. Erdogan went on television to defend the new regulations, saying, “I love my nation, and I want to protect them from bad habits.”37 Elsewhere, he said that “when two drunkards make a law, you respect it. But when we make a law for something that faith orders, you reject it. Why?”38

Clearly, Kemalists didn’t have a problem with state power or paternalism as such. These, after all, were defining features of the Kemalist era. If a Kemalist prime minister had prohibited alcohol sales after 10 P.M., there would have been little outrage. It wasn’t, then, the what but the why. Even if neither side was particularly original in their thinking about the state, the real dividing line was about ideas and ideology more than it was about the fact of state power, a fact on which they both readily agreed.

What worried the secular opposition most was the ambiguity around the AKP’s ultimate goals. As we saw earlier, Turkish Islamists had downplayed, even conceded, their Islamism, focusing instead on expanding freedoms and moving closer to Europe. This was “post-Islamism,” which became a popular term in academia, in part because of what many saw as a brave new future of Islam, secularism, and modernity merging together. But it didn’t last, which left the small but influential group of Turkish liberals who initially backed the AKP “model” wondering what went wrong. One Turkish liberal who served as an advisor to AKP figures recalls the discontent of the party’s conservative base in the early 2000s.39 After a landslide victory in which the AKP won 66 percent of the seats (despite winning only 34.3 percent of the popular vote), supporters were expecting quick changes on perennial grievances such as the head-scarf ban. For those who wore the head scarf, few things were as immediate and urgent as this, affecting where you could work or study. Yet those changes were still to come. The advisor recalled an AKP leader saying in 2003 that “only after we increase the space for civilian rule can we serve the needs of the Muslim base.” Politics was the art of the possible, and in 2003 many of the things the AKP hoped to do simply weren’t possible.

I found this question endlessly intriguing: How conscious was the AKP’s “politics of stages”? Can we really imagine party figures sitting around a table in a dark, windowless room plotting their slow but steady takeover of the state? I spoke to one of the founders of the AKP, Yasar Yakis, in the hope of finding some clarity. Yakis hadn’t formally parted ways with his old colleagues, but he had grown distant from the party. “I don’t recognize the ideals of the party,” he told me. Yakis looked fondly upon those early days, before it all changed. Yakis was in his early sixties at the time, but it sounded a bit like college dropouts starting a tech company: “We were drafting the election manifesto and it came to the section on foreign policy and my colleagues told me they don’t understand anything about foreign policy and that I can go home and write whatever I want and read it to them the day after.” He smiled and I laughed. “So that’s what I did. I spent hours until three thirty in the morning that night to write the section.”40 Yakis became the AKP’s first foreign minister in 2002.

“We were cautious in the beginning not to threaten the judiciary, the military, and the bureaucracy,” Yakis explained. “The ‘tactical program’ [to wait until the right moment to promote a more religious agenda] may have existed in Erdogan’s mind, but not in the minds of many others.” Similarly, a senior advisor to Ahmet Davutoglu brushed away the suggestion. “Even if this was the AKP’s plan, it does not matter,” he told me. “They needed political power first to make these changes. The AKP came out of the 1997 coup, and the party itself and the society were not ready for this kind of change in the beginning.”41 On the other hand, referring to the party’s shift toward a more Islamic agenda, one AKP parliamentary candidate told me, “This was Erdogan’s plan from the beginning. He just had to wait to find the right time and the right people.”42

When we look back at recent history, it can be tempting to superimpose a certain logic and meaning to disparate events. We want to thread a narrative. At the center of the narrative is a man like Erdogan, a towering figure, whose vision—in retrospect—seems unbending and undeniable, as if it were always there. It wasn’t. None of this was inevitable. Erdogan and his colleagues had no idea how successful they would be. At the time, they were driven, if anything, by fear—fear that there would be yet another coup and that their party would be dissolved once again (an outcome that was averted by only one vote in the 2008 closure case). They had to concede their Islamism, and this is what they did. The alternative was to confront the secular establishment head-on, but that had already been tried, and it had failed.

Turkish Islamists happened to live in a world where influential domestic and international actors were suspicious of and even hostile toward them. If they wanted to survive, they had to learn how to suppress at least some of what they believed in. If they crossed a red line—and it was never entirely clear where the red lines were—then that could be enough for Turkish courts to deem them a font of antisecular agitation. There will always be a gap between what people believe and what they actually do. It’s become so commonplace that we barely bat an eye when politicians transparently pander to a group of voters. But it’s one thing to pander in the search of votes—because ultimately those voters will hold you accountable for your performance—and another to wonder whether something you say might put you in prison or bring about the dissolution of your party.

Erdogan’s shift to the right was less a premeditated plan by a brilliant, conniving politician and more a case of shifting incentives. The threat of military intervention (the stick) and the promise of EU accession (the carrot) were effectively removed. If those incentives had a moderating effect, then presumably their removal would allow the AKP to proceed along a more “natural” path. In other words, it was now possible for them to be who they were. In the words of Yasar Yakis, “as circumstances and opportunities allowed, AKP pursued its interests.” When those circumstances and opportunities changed, so too did the AKP. Anyone in their position would have done the same.

Of course, this wasn’t just anyone. It was Erdogan. And some individuals are better at seizing opportunities than others. Here the role of individuals becomes important and even more so when polarization is endemic. It’s an interesting counterfactual: What if AKP cofounder and former president Abdullah Gul—a professor of economics with little stomach for confrontation—had become the unquestioned leader of the AKP? An aide to Gul told me that, after spending years at the man’s side, he believed Gul was just as “Islamist” as Erdogan, if not more so.43 As if talking about a dear uncle, he fondly remembered Gul’s discomfort after watching a movie. “Such a passionate kiss isn’t appropriate,” he recalls the president saying (although I imagine it sounded less awkward in Turkish). He joked that he couldn’t tell Gul about the woman he was dating, fretting over what the president would think of him. “Gul and Erdogan believe in similar things, but the difference is in how to express it,” the aide told me. “Gul, for example, hates populist discourse. He’s also a pragmatist. He’ll look at something and say, ‘There’s no possibility of me doing it, so why should I take the risk?’ And he wants people to be more religious, so he worries that divisive rhetoric undermines the cause.” Tensions first emerged between Erdogan and Gul in 2007, after nearly a decade of partnership, when Gul ran for president after Erdogan elected not to. Eight years later, Erdogan was clearly dominant, while Gul had receded to the background.

Erdogan was many things, but a mild-mannered economics professor wasn’t one of them. Even his bitter enemies describe him as one of those politicians who come around once in a lifetime. Like Ataturk, he has become, for better or worse, synonymous with modern Turkey. They speak in awe of his charisma, his way around a room, as well as his personal warmth—assuming he liked you. “If you give him fifteen minutes, he can convince anyone who’s neutral to come to his side,” said one such critic.44

As much as they matter, powerful individuals are rarely the sole or even primary cause of party transformations. They can, however, strengthen and reinforce certain trajectories. Where Gul erred on the side of caution, Erdogan was more than willing to succumb to ambition. Erdogan was fond of speaking of a society in the throes of transformation. This was the “new Turkey,” as he called it, in sharp contrast to the old. Reflecting on his accomplishments in a 2015 speech, Erdogan insisted that this was just the beginning: “Change is inevitable. The building of a new Turkey is inevitable. A new constitution is inevitable. A presidential system is, God willing, inevitable.”45 Increasingly, Erdogan portrayed himself as a statesman on par with Ataturk. In March 2014, he released a video suggesting he was leading Turkey’s “second war of independence,” shortly after an AKP press release referred to him as the “builder of Turkey.”46

Under Gul, the AKP would have likely drifted in the same general direction, but not to the same extent and not in the same polarizing manner. As much as Erdogan believed in a more explicitly “Islamic” agenda, he also knew that it was a good way to win votes, something that Gul would have realized as well. In democratic contexts, ideological parties often have an incentive to move to the center and reach out to the broadest cross section of the electorate. A socialist party can’t rely solely on the working class because there aren’t enough workers. Christian Democrats in Europe can’t simply appeal to Catholic conservatives because Catholic conservatives are only a small minority, and a dwindling one at that. But this supposedly moderating effect of democracy depends on the distribution of voters. In a conservative center-right country like Turkey, the calculus shifts. The AKP’s natural base of religiously inclined voters is large, so there was little to be lost and much to be gained in rallying the base. And no one did this better than Erdogan. (This strategy seemed, if only briefly, to reach its limits in the June 2015 parliamentary elections, when the AKP lost a significant share of its seats. Yet, even at its worst, the AKP still won 47 percent of the seats—about 6 percent more seats than Egypt’s Muslim Brotherhood or Tunisia’s Ennahda did at their best.)

During my interviews with Turkish activists and politicians, the specter of Erdogan loomed large, sometimes in amusing ways. I had met with Mazhar Bagli, the AKP official, at the party headquarters in Ankara. To get to his office, I had to pass through a wide doorway with two big blown-up pictures of Erdogan on either side. It was almost as if they wanted to make sure we never forgot: Erdogan was watching. When I met with Davutoglu’s advisor, he left the television on in the background. He couldn’t see it, but I could. And there was Erdogan gesturing, speaking off the cuff, giving what seemed like a fiery speech. Try as I might, I couldn’t escape this towering figure of Turkish politics.

Being the populist he was, Erdogan took pride in his connection to the “people.” He was just like them, growing up in a working-class family and hailing from the rougher parts of Istanbul. “Street fighter” is one of the descriptors people use, some in admiration, others in disdain. Even as the most powerful man in Turkey since Ataturk, Erdogan kept playing the role of outsider fighting a host of enemies, both real and imagined. A ruling party that sounds like an opposition party even when it’s in power is an odd—and potentially dangerous—thing.


A Desire for Revenge

For many Turkish Islamists, it’s personal. They were subjugated, persecuted, and made to feel like pariahs in their own country. The state told them that to be a Turk was to be something other than what they were. Finally, after waiting decades, they had an opportunity to redress the wrongs of the past. In so doing, they claimed an unprecedented mandate, having expanded their share of the vote in successive elections, reaching a peak of 49.8 percent of the popular vote in the 2011 elections. They called it “normalization”—a term suggesting that an Islamically oriented state and society was the natural state of Turkey and that the secularization that had come before was a forced aberration. This was justice. But what some call justice, others called revenge.

I had spent years getting to know Islamist activists and leaders in Egypt, Jordan, Tunisia, and elsewhere in the region. While the various groups differed considerably according to their local contexts, the one thing they all shared was a desire to at least sound conciliatory, even if they weren’t particularly serious about it. They would emphasize their desire to coexist and cooperate with secularists. One can debate the sincerity of the rhetoric, but the pretense was there. What was striking about many of my conversations with AKP officials and supporters was that the pretense seemed to be lacking. Gone was the talk of compromise and national unity that had peppered AKP statements in the early 2000s. They couldn’t have been more dismissive of the secular opposition and, at times, the message was some variation of “bring it on.”

Troubling as it was, there was something refreshing about their honesty. I remember when Mazhar Bagli brought out a piece of paper and scribbled a picture for me to illustrate the point. There was a small circle and a big circle. This represented the past. The small circle—the 20 percent of secularists—controlled the country at the expense of the big circle, everyone else. He then drew another pair of circles, again one big and one small, to emphasize the shift. In the new Turkey, the big circle, inside of which he wrote 80 percent, had finally gotten its due, and secularists now had to accept the reality. Not only was this “justice”—the redress of past wrongs—it was “democracy.” Eighty percent may be an exaggeration, but Turkey was no doubt a nation of many observant Muslims. Sixty-seven percent of Turks claim religion is a “very important” part of their lives.47 In a 2006 survey, nearly 45 percent of Turks considered themselves “Muslim” above other identity markers, whether nationalist or ethnic.48 Meanwhile, in a 2012 Pew poll, only 8 percent of Turkish men say they never attend mosque, while 42 percent of all Turks say they pray several times per day, if not the full five times per day.49

Though Erdogan’s illiberal and authoritarian tendencies have sparked significant opposition, including the 2013 Gezi Park protests, his supporters insist he is merely acting within his democratic mandate. The senior advisor to Davutoglu took it a few steps further than Bagli. “Secular idiot elites were just five percent of the population,” he told me. The secular Republican People’s Party (CHP)—the party of Ataturk—was a “mistake in our history.” The CHP, he suggested, should change its name, since it was synonymous with blood and subjugation. “You shut down all the mosques. True? True. You burned the Quran. True? True,” he said. “Everyone has a story from his ancestors” about Republican repression, and so the CHP has to “get rid of its past and say it: ‘This was wrong.’” For Islamists, the greatest symbol of the trauma of secular rule was the head-scarf ban. It meant that women couldn’t work in state institutions, whether as teachers, parliamentarians, diplomats, or civil servants. If you were a student, the university could compel you to take it off. Erdogan’s two daughters, Sumeyye and Esra, went to school in the United States. In other words, their father was the head of government—the most powerful man in the country—yet they couldn’t go to university in their own country (the ban in universities was lifted in 2010).

For the Davutoglu advisor, it was similarly personal. His wife, a doctor, couldn’t work in a state hospital for seven years and was only finally able to gain employment in 2014. His bitterness was palpable. He admitted that the AKP’s rhetoric was sometimes harsh and that there were excesses. “Normalization pains,” as he called them, were inevitable. But I wanted to understand: What would all these growing pains amount to? What would mark the end of this process of Turkey returning to itself? “Secularists live with Ataturk’s corpse,” he told me, his voice rising. “If we want this normalization process to reach its maturity, we need to carry Mr. Ataturk to his grave again and close that chapter and start a new Turkey.” This was a striking thing to say about the founder of modern Turkey, someone to whom successive Islamist parties had shown deference. The implications of the advisor’s remark were clear enough. The struggle was ongoing, and it wouldn’t end until secularists stopped believing what they believed about the meaning and purpose of the Turkish state.

* * *

THE IDEA OF “POST-ISLAMISM” was appealing because it suggested that the fault lines that threatened to tear apart Middle Eastern societies could be transcended. It was a false hope. Post-Islamism only “worked” to the extent that divides over the role of religion could be papered over and postponed. That was fine as far as it went. But it was unsustainable. When in 2010 the AKP stood victorious in its battle for civilian control of the military and secured yet another election landslide, the question of what the AKP hoped to do with its burgeoning power would reemerge.

The longer the AKP stayed in power and embraced the expansive reach of the Turkish state, the more pressure they would face from an impatient base to deliver on something as basic as a woman dressing the way that she wanted. Yet in Turkey few things were as polarizing as this, not necessarily because secularists were dead set against the head scarf itself, but more because they feared the changes were a sign of things to come.





