2. Is Islam “Exceptional”?

It may seem odd to begin exploring a modern predicament by examining a series of events that took place more than fourteen centuries ago. How much could all of that possibly matter? At Thanksgiving dinner with family and friends in 2014, I was struck by how much those events still do matter. There were eight of us, all Muslims, from assorted backgrounds and levels of religious commitment. Over generous helpings of turkey, mashed potatoes, gravy, and stuffing, we found ourselves talking about the scourge of terrorism and the responsibility of Muslims to say and do something about it. Soon enough, we were talking about Yazid, the second caliph of the Umayyad Empire, killing and beheading the Prophet Mohamed’s grandson, Hussein, at the Battle of Karbala. It was like an open wound, and here we were once again, as so many had before us, trying to make sense of how and why something so unspeakable could have happened. This was the Prophet’s family, his flesh and blood. And yet Hussein and all of his men were slaughtered, their bodies left to rot for forty days.

It wasn’t dissimilar from the other questions we were asking ourselves that day about the rise of the Islamic State, civil wars, and the seemingly endless shedding of blood: How could Muslims do this to each other? The Battle of Karbala is only one story. We could have talked about Omar, Abu Bakr, Uthman, and Ali, the Prophet Mohamed’s closest companions and the so-called righteously guided caliphs. The first caliph, Abu Bakr, died of old age, but his three successors were each assassinated by fellow Muslims. When we were growing up and going to Sunday school (yes, Muslim-Americans have Sunday school, too), Abu Bakr, Omar, and Ali didn’t feel like historical figures but, rather, people who were a part of our lives, reminders of both a glorious history and the internecine killing that threatened to undo it.

The era of the righteously guided caliphs didn’t last long, but it was superseded by any number of other “golden ages,” which flourished for far longer. The Abbasid caliphate was one of the most successful empires the world had ever seen. From the eighth to thirteenth centuries, the empire prospered, with unprecedented advancements in science, medicine, and philosophy. Students from Europe flocked to Muslim universities, hoping to study with the world’s greatest doctors, thinkers, and theologians. Muslims today, particularly in the Arab world, enter into tortured debates over what went wrong, with this history as subtext.

The dismal state of the Middle East is all the more difficult to accept knowing that, for much of the past fourteen centuries, there was a great deal to be proud of. This dissonance is unsettling. Perceptions of decline were often overlaid with a kind of theological determinism. Was the decline some sort of divine retribution? After centuries of dominance, the various Islamic empires were gradually eclipsed by a rising Europe. Then came the trauma of colonialism, when much of the Muslim world fell under direct, and often brutal, European control. Hard-won independence offered a gleam of hope, but the promise of secular nationalism ultimately disappointed, with young nations descending into dictatorship. Perhaps God had forsaken the Muslims, punishing them for straying from the straight path. After all, God had promised glad tidings for those who followed his commands, and he had, seemingly, delivered for centuries. The most devout—the Prophet, his companions, and their earliest followers—had enjoyed unimaginable success, conquering the entirety of North Africa, then spreading out through Spain and into France within a hundred years of the Prophet’s passing. This must have been evidence of their righteousness. That, though, could only mean that the territorial contraction of once great empires must have been evidence of sin and decadence.

The Ottoman Empire, hoping to stave off decline in the nineteenth century, launched a series of internal reforms, known as the tanzimat. Though this wasn’t their intent, the tanzimat hastened what Wael Hallaq calls the “evisceration” of the sharia.1 In an attempt to codify and control what had been an organic and constantly evolving body of law, the state was strengthened and centralized, its authoritarian tendencies exacerbated, and the clerics weakened. Secularists, meanwhile, believed that the Islamic state couldn’t be reformed and that holding on to religious foundations would only stand in the way of progress. If embracing secular nationalism had led to Europe’s ascendance, they argued, then why shouldn’t it do the same for the Middle East? Among elites, assorted secular ideologies—Marxism, socialism, fascism, and liberalism—gained currency. Islamic modernists, the precursors to modern-day Islamists, interpreted events quite differently, viewing the deteriorating state of the region as yet more evidence of God’s displeasure. To regain his pleasure would require returning to the unblemished purity of Islam’s founding. This notion of return, novel in the late nineteenth century, would, in mere decades, become ubiquitous to the point of cliché.

Born in 1929, the Islamist writer Muhammad Galak Kishk saw the triumph of religion nearly everywhere, even in the most unlikely of places. In 1967, Israel handily defeated the Arab nations not simply because of its military prowess, but because it had something that the Arabs didn’t: the certainty and clarity of religious devotion. As Fouad Ajami writes, “In Kishk’s account there is grudging admiration for the clarity with which the Israelis saw the war, for the fact that young Israeli soldiers prayed behind their rabbis at the Wailing Wall after their capture of Jerusalem.”2 Kishk’s may not have been the most accurate reading of Israeli society, but it was one of the more telling.

If this clarity—this purity of vision—had been lost, then where better to regain it than at the beginning? This is what the various revivalist movements hoped to do. The Islamic modernists hoped to recapture the spirit and intent of that first generation of Muslims, while those who would come to be known as Salafis believed not just in the “spirit” but in the “letter” of the law. They wanted to imitate the particular habits of the first Muslims, whether that meant dressing like the Prophet (by cuffing their trousers at the ankle) or brushing their teeth like the Prophet (with a teeth-cleaning twig called a miswak). Oddly enough, for these various Islamist strains, more recent Islamic history has grown more remote. Outside Turkey, most Muslims would have trouble citing even one Ottoman-era scholar. The Abbasid caliphate is remembered fondly, but its memory doesn’t necessarily inspire fighting and dying for the cause. In contrast, there is a closeness about the Prophet and his companions that belies fourteen hundred years of the passing of time. It is an odd, unusual effect—the further one goes back in history, the more intimate it feels.

* * *

MUSLIMS ARE, OF COURSE, not bound to Islam’s founding moment, but neither can they fully escape it. The Prophet Mohamed was a theologian, a politician, a warrior, a preacher, and a merchant, all at once. Importantly, he was also the builder of a new state. It is difficult to know when he was acting in one role rather than the other (which has led to endless debates over whether some of the Prophet’s actions in certain domains were, in fact, prophetic). Some religious thinkers—including Sudan’s Mahmoud Mohamed Taha and, later, his student Abdullahi an-Na’im—have tried to separate these different prophetic legacies, arguing that the Quran contains two messages. The first message, based on the verses revealed while the Prophet was establishing a new political community in Medina, includes particulars of Islamic law that may have been appropriate for seventh-century Arabia but are not applicable outside that context. The second message of Islam, found in the so-called Meccan verses, encompasses the eternal principles of Islam, which are meant to be updated according to the demands of time and place.3 Taha was executed by the Jaafar al-Nimeiry regime in 1985 and his theories largely forgotten. But the basic idea of extracting general principles while emphasizing the historicity of their application has, in less explicit form, been advocated by a growing number of “progressive” Muslim scholars, many of whom live in the West.

There are reasons, though, that these theories have struggled to gain adherents in the Muslim world. First of all, they’re not very easily explained to those without a background in Islamic law. For many Muslims, the point of Islam is that it is accessible and straightforward, at least in its broad outlines. The notion that the Quran contains two distinct messages is not straightforward and makes a “simple” religion rather complex. Why would a believing Muslim take a chance on a controversial and heterodox interpretation of scripture when he or she can fall back on a safer, mainstream approach that enjoys the backing of the vast majority of scholars?

One could go further and advocate not only for a progressive interpretation of Islamic law but also for its basic irrelevance to public life—that the separation of religion from politics forms the foundation of any pluralistic post-Enlightenment liberal society. As we will see, however, the heavy weight of Islamic history makes such a path as difficult as it is unlikely.

* * *

JUDAISM MIGHT SEEM LIKE a natural point of comparison for Islam. There is, after all, a vast corpus of halakhic law—the product of centuries of rabbinic interpretation. The question of how society should be governed according to God’s commandments was—at least for a time—a matter of rich discussion. But a body of law or a political tradition, on its own, is rarely enough. This is a theme I will return to throughout the book: Religion, as powerful as it is, requires a conducive environment to shape political life in a significant and lasting way. And this is where Judaism parts ways with Islam. After the second Jewish temple was destroyed in 70 AD at the hands of the Romans, Jews would, for more than eighteen hundred years, find themselves living as minorities under the rule of largely Christian and Muslim powers. This meant that Jewish law could not be implemented by the state. Judaism had to make its peace, to the extent that it could, with non-Jewish rule. Delineating between the political and religious realms became necessary, sometimes even a matter of life and death. Legal thinkers had to adapt their understanding of the law accordingly. In exile, rabbinic Judaism, particularly in the Talmud and subsequent commentaries, became preoccupied with personal and communal responsibilities rather than political rule.

As the great political theorist Michael Walzer explains, “since writers in the [Jewish] diaspora could not recapitulate the experience represented in that text [the Hebrew Bible], they were forced into a radical reinterpretation or, better, a series of reinterpretations, of its meaning.”4 Rabbis increasingly distinguished between civil and economic matters, on the one hand, and nonnegotiable religious principles, on the other. As the editors of the seminal four-volume work The Jewish Political Tradition note: “We may read this as a more or less straightforward distinction between secular and religious regulation.”5

With the founding of the state of Israel, Jewish law and its relationship to the state became relevant once again. By this time, however, what Israel’s first prime minister, David Ben-Gurion, called the “ingathering of the exiles” meant that many of the Jewish state’s earliest citizens were just as much a product of European conceptions of religion and state as they were their own (whatever that now meant, almost two millennia later).6 The new state, being democratic, was a reflection of the preferences of its citizens, and these had now been indelibly marked by secularism. Religion would play an important role in public life, just as it did in the United States, but few questioned the basic, and mostly secular, foundations of the Israeli state. On this there was a wide-ranging consensus, even if it has eroded somewhat with time. Meanwhile, Ultra Orthodox movements, as illiberal as they may be, have little interest in re-creating or returning to an invented past. They seek to guard, rather than dismantle, the long, rich tradition of rabbinic Judaism, a tradition that had, for nearly two thousand years, little to say about law and governance. As the Brookings Institution’s Natan Sachs, a leading expert on Israeli politics, puts it, “While there are extremists, there aren’t truly ‘fundamentalist’ Jews in the literal sense. I don’t know even know what that would look like.”7

Judaism and Islam’s approach to governance is a fascinating and important topic that deserves greater attention from researchers. For our purposes, however, Christianity provides a more fruitful point of comparison, since it is the only other monotheistic faith that has aspired to the same level of universality as Islam, seeking to expand its domain among nonbelievers and enjoying centuries of sovereignty to experiment with matters of religion and state. Across a wide stretch of territory, Christianity was dominant, infusing itself in every facet of public life and politics. Yet, after considerable resistance, it eventually succumbed to secularization. This chapter explores why and how this secularization process came to be—and why, for various historical, political, and theological reasons, it is unlikely to be repeated in the Islamic context.

* * *

THE FOUNDING MOMENTS OF Islam and Christianity couldn’t have been more different. (Muslims would say that it had to be different—otherwise what would be the point?). Where Mohamed was the head of a state, Jesus was a dissident against a reigning political order, the Roman Empire. Because there was no real prospect of governing, there is little in his message that concerns itself with governance. There was also a natural limit to the “practicality” of Jesus’s message. Jesus, for Christians, was divine, and so emulating him in any precise way was difficult. It was also somewhat beside the point. The spirit of the New Testament was one, if anything, of transcending the affairs of this world. Mohamed, on the other hand, was very much not divine. While deeply loved by Muslims, there is something prosaic—and therefore relatable—about his reign. Mohamed would rely on advice from his companions, and he occasionally made mistakes. Instead of transcending sin through grace, many Muslims believe that they can and should mimic the Prophetic model in exacting, sometimes even obsessive, detail.* (No one, as far as I’m aware, talks about cuffing their trousers the way Jesus did.)

Of course, one can look back at Jesus’s short life and see him as a distinctly political figure. As Reza Aslan documents in his book Zealot: The Life and Times of Jesus of Nazareth, Jesus very explicitly challenged the Roman establishment, preaching against both Roman officials and many of his fellow Jews, who he believed were complicit in Roman corruption. In fact, Jesus was so political, argues Aslan, that his legacy incited one of the most destabilizing revolts in the history of the Roman Empire and subsequently one of its most brutal crackdowns. Consumed by “revolutionary fervor,” Jesus entered Jerusalem in his last days and cleansed the temple, which the Roman authorities treated as an act of rebellion.8 Christianity, in this sense, offers inspiration for challenging the political and economic status quo. One example is liberation theology, which flourished throughout Latin America in the 1960s and 70s and readily tapped into this heritage. But it is a heritage that lends itself more to an oppositional posture than to any particular views about forms of government, statehood, or legal structures. It was Jesus, after all, who said, “my kingdom is not of this world” (John 18:36). As Brad Gregory, a leading historian of Christianity, notes, “In no sense did Jesus exhort his followers to seek the exercise of power—just the opposite.”9

Given his circumstances, Jesus might not have discussed the exercise of power, but that didn’t necessarily close the matter. That there is a quest for the “historical Jesus”—reflected in a voluminous academic literature—suggests a diversity and even confusion about Jesus’s life and his relationship to the Roman authorities. (As Aslan notes, “there are only two hard historical facts about Jesus of Nazareth upon which we can confidently rely,” that Jesus “was a Jew who led a popular Jewish movement in Palestine … [and] that Rome crucified him for doing so.”)10 In some ways, then, what matters more than the life of Jesus is how his successors interpreted and actualized his legacy. In the first centuries of this new Christian faith, there was a conspicuous lack of any positive vision of the state from thinkers and theologians.

There is more agreement, at least among Muslims, about Mohamed’s life, in part because his companions and followers were intent on assembling a corpus of his sayings, known as hadith. Over time, these reports solidified into authoritative collections of “authentic” hadith, which in turn served to clarify and express the established practice, or sunna, of the Prophet, covering his words, deeds, and general conduct in every imaginable sphere of life (there are hadiths delineating how the Prophet ate pumpkin soup, for example).11 This sunna, along with the Quran, were the two foundational sources in the formulation of Islamic law, upon which everything else was built. In understanding the development of sharia, it also helped that there was no interruption between the founding of Mohamed’s state in Medina, the early caliphate of the four righteously guided companions, then the Umayyad caliphate, followed by the Abbasid caliphate. Empires and dynasties were frequently marked by sedition and infighting, but there was never not a caliphate (though there were often competing “caliphates”).* In this respect, there is, for Sunnis at least, a continuous lineage of widely accepted and legitimate Islamic political order up until the Ottoman caliphate’s abolition in 1924.

That the Christian tradition seems ambivalent about law, governance, and power is no accident. Islam and Christianity are, after all, meant to do different things. Law, at least in part, is about exposing and punishing sin. Yet, when Jesus died on the cross, he, in effect, released man from the burdens of sin and, therefore, from the burdens of law. With the coming of Christ, salvation is achieved through faith in Jesus Christ rather than through observance of the law.

In the New Testament, the law (meaning Old Testament law) is often treated as something unnecessary, divisive, and heavy. In the words of Paul, it is even a “curse.” Paul says in Galatians that “for all who rely on the works of the law are under a curse … Clearly no one who relies on the law is justified before God, because ‘the righteous will live by faith.’ … Christ redeemed us from the curse of the law by becoming a curse for us” (Gal. 3:10–11, 13). Elsewhere, the author of Ephesians writes that Christ “abolished … the law with its commandments and ordinances” (Eph. 2:15).

Christianity’s story of salvation is one of progression, with humanity passing through different stages of spiritual development. Jewish or Mosaic law was provisional, meant for a particular place and time and for a particular chosen people, whereas Christianity was universal and everlasting. As the theologian Joshua Ralston notes, reflecting on the writing of the early Christian theologian Justin Martyr, “Christ is the new and final law, and thus the Law of Moses is abrogated.… Justin argues that the God of Israel had promised the Israelites a new and everlasting covenant. The Mosaic Law was never intended to be either universal or eternally binding.”12

In short, it’s not so much that Christianity has little to say about law; it’s that this ambivalence, or even opposition, to law was a feature of Christian theology during its early development. In later centuries, Christianity—and particularly the Catholic Church—no doubt played a powerful role in public life, but this did not mean there was any real equivalent to Islamic law. As Ralston writes, “Simply put, there is nothing resembling a developed Christian account of public law in the New Testament.”13 This had important implications: “Christian theology, especially in the medieval period, primarily divides ecclesial law from civil law into distinct spheres of society. Ecclesial laws govern the church and civil laws govern the public.”14

If salvation is through Christ and Christ alone, then there is little need for the state to regulate private and public behavior beyond providing a conducive environment for individuals to cultivate virtue and become more faithful to Christ. The punishment of sins is no longer a priority, since Jesus died for them. In stark contrast, whereas theologians like Martin Luther famously fashioned a dialectic between faith and good works, these two things are inextricably tied together in Islam. Faith is often expressed through the observance of the law. The failure to follow Islamic law is a reflection of the believer’s lack of faith and unwillingness to submit to God. Salvation is impossible without law. This has implications for the nature of the Islamic state. If following the sharia—for example, refraining from alcohol and adultery, observing the fast, and praying five times a day—is a precondition for salvation, then the state has a role in encouraging the good and forbidding evil, a role it played, to various degrees, for the entirety of the premodern period.



God’s Word and God’s Speech

Related to “founding moments” is the question of a text’s inerrancy and infallibility. As a creedal requirement, Muslims believe that the Quran is not just divinely inspired but that it is God’s actual direct and literal speech. As a foundational tenet of Islam, on which so many other tenets depend, it is difficult to overstate the centrality of divine authorship and how it affects the interpretation and practical application of Islam. Contrary to what many think, there is simply no Christian equivalent to Quranic inerrancy, even among far-right evangelicals. Throughout Christian history, no major sect or denomination has ever asserted that the Bible is God’s actual speech.

The Chicago Statement on Biblical Inerrancy, published in 1978 and signed by over two hundred leading evangelical figures, clarifies what had, by then, become a contested and misunderstood word. The concept of inerrancy, in a general sense, refers to the “complete truthfulness of Scripture” and the fact that it is “free from all falsehood.” It is the “infallible divine authority.” This, however, does not mean that evangelicals believe that the Bible is the word of God, at least not in the literal sense of every letter and word being directly from God. As the Chicago Statement explains, the Bible is “the authoritative Word of God” but “written by men prepared and superintended by His Spirit.” Elsewhere, the signatories affirm “that inspiration was the work in which God by His Spirit, through human writers, gave us His Word,” and, moreover, that God “utilized the distinctive personalities and literary styles of the writers whom He had chosen.”15

Christians also disagree about what the Bible actually is—the relative importance of various books and who exactly wrote them. The New Testament is not a single work but, rather, an anthology of various constituent books, including the Gospels and the twenty-one “epistles.” Moreover, the writing and canonization of the New Testament took place over a relatively long period of time, with a commonly accepted biblical canon only emerging in the fourth century. Early Christian scholars produced critical interpretations of the scripture well before the widespread acceptance of this canon.16

The Quran, meanwhile, has only one “mediator”—Mohamed—and, according to Muslims, only one author—God. Muslims often criticize the Bible for being written by men, but this elides the fact that scripture is less foundational in Christianity than it is in Islam. In Christianity, the word of God became flesh in Jesus Christ, so the equivalent of the Quran in Christianity is more the person of Jesus than the texts of the New Testament. As the Catholic scholar and priest Maurice Borrmans writes, “The Word of God came into the world ‘in the fullness of time’ not in the form of a scripture, but in the person of Jesus Christ, the revelation of the Father and the presence of God in the world of human beings.”17 The Jesuit theologian Daniel Madigan writes, “John does not claim that his letter is the Word of life, but rather that it is about the Word of life. The Word, he tells us, is something you can see and touch and live with, not because it has been written down, but because it has become flesh.”18 If, then, the Bible seems less compelling to Muslims as revelation, that’s only because God’s ultimate revelation in Christianity is a man and not a book.

In short, this is a key distinction between Islam and Christianity and one that is not just a product of modern changes in taste. Throughout the history of both religions, the relationship to the text has been different in this important though often overlooked way. To put it differently, even the most liberal Muslims believe things about the Quran—direct and total divine authorship—that even the most fundamentalist Christians don’t believe about the Bible.

That Muslims go well beyond Christian notions of scriptural inerrancy and believe that the Quran is God’s actual speech does not necessarily mean they believe it should be taken literally. In fact, at least three of the four main Sunni schools of Islamic law are not literalist and emphasize authorial intent, cultural and political context, and scholarly interpretation of what is a complex and challenging revelation. The question, however, remains: Does the Muslim view of the Quran as God’s speech have distinctive political implications? The notion that the actions of groups like the Muslim Brotherhood or Ennahda can be deduced by looking at seventh-century scripture seems absurd on its face, and it is. But in the modern Middle East, Quranic inerrancy matters in ways that are more basic but perhaps less obvious.


Religions and Their Resources

Of course, major religions with billions of followers across space and time cannot be reduced to any one thing. But as Michael Cook notes, religions are neither interchangeable nor merely “putty in the hands of exegetes.”19 Every faith tradition is characterized by a diversity of ideas, methodological approaches, and theological debates. The late Harvard scholar Shahab Ahmed writes, for example, of “the capaciousness, complexity, and, often, outright contradiction” contained within the historical phenomenon of what we call Islam.20 But each faith tradition is also defined by boundaries, expectations, and the accumulated “weight” of history. What religious scholars and lay believers alike have committed themselves to for centuries—in the case of Islam, since its very founding—is relevant, for the simple reason that if something has never been done before, then it is less likely that it will start being done all of a sudden, fourteen centuries later.

Another way to look at this is through the prism of “resources.” After a systematic comparison of the development of Islam, Christianity, and Hinduism, Cook concludes that Islam provides richer resources for those engaged in politics. This essentially means that if a Muslim reads scripture, they will find in the Quran and the prophetic model a preponderance of commands to observe various aspects of Islamic law. If they are so inclined, they may find ways to dismiss particular rules as “inapplicable” or not meeting the conditions for implementation, but they cannot really ignore or dismiss them altogether. In the Quran, there are clear, direct textual injunctions ranging from the implementation of the hudud punishments to specific rules on inheritance. The verses are there, and they are God’s speech, not merely inspired by him. In short, to the extent that a believer is even vaguely familiar with the Quran and hadith, they will, in effect, be predisposed to think about the relationship of religion to politics in a particular way. To be sure, they will also find quite a bit to support the separation between caliph and cleric, or what we might call separation of mosque and state. This, however, is quite different than the separation of religion from politics (or as Ahmed puts it, “division of labor is not the same thing as division of product”).21 We saw earlier how the premodern clerical class enjoyed significant autonomy and provided a meaningful check on executive power. One could even go further and say that, historically, the implementation of sharia law was dependent on at least some separation of mosque and state. This, though, is unlikely to be of much reassurance to proponents of secularization, which entails a process through which religion becomes less, rather than more, involved in questions of law, politics, and governance.

In Christianity’s founding moment, there was Jesus’s famous “render unto Caesar what is his” (Mark 12:17), a kind of clarion call for Europe’s early secularists. Within Islam, those intent on finding something that offers doctrinal support for the privatization of religion and the separation of religion from politics will struggle to find much of use. This is not to say it can’t be done—Mahmoud Mohamed Taha and Abdullahi an-Nai’m are proof that it can—but it requires such conceptual stretching, hermeneutical acrobatics, and sheer creativity that it is unlikely a large number of Muslims will sign on. This, I would argue, is why they haven’t.

In short, there are more resources for Muslims making “Islamic” arguments than for those making arguments for European-style secularism. While specific outcomes in the real world of politics aren’t fixed, the resources that are available within the tradition are more or less stable, and they are fixed in favor of one side in the ongoing debate over the role of religion in public life. It should be noted that this Islamic heritage is available to all Muslims and not just Islamists. In other words, Islamism doesn’t necessarily require Islamists. Where “secular” parties win in conservative countries, they tend to do so not by aggressively affirming their secularism but by downplaying or denying it altogether. They assert their Islamic credentials and even—as in Indonesia and Malaysia—go out of their way to pass and implement sharia legislation. In Egypt, the most anti-Islamist leader in the country’s history, Abdel Fattah al-Sissi, is often portrayed as “secular,” but, in reality, he openly and publicly advocates a strong role for religion in politics, going so far as to claim that the job of a president includes “presenting God [correctly].”22 This, then, goes well beyond the question of whether Islamists or their opponents are in power. It is a more a question of how Islam—as a tradition, heritage, corpus of law, and source of inspiration—relates to politics than merely one of how Islamists relate to politics.



Is Islam the Most “Modern” Religion?

All of this might suggest Islam is a retrograde and decidedly medieval religion. Indeed, conservative Muslims and Islamists are routinely portrayed as backward fundamentalists alienated by modernity and all that comes with it. Yet Islam may very well be the most “modern” of the monotheistic religions and perhaps of any major religion. This presents us with a paradox: It is precisely Islam and Islamic law’s modern bent that makes Islamism—so often portrayed as antimodern—all the more relevant and resonant in today’s politics. Within Islam’s vast legal tradition, there are a number of ideas and precedents that lend themselves to modern notions of social justice, rule of law, and democratic politics. In practice, this meant that there was no reason for Muslims to choose modernity over Islam. You could be fully Muslim, or even fully Islamist, and still be fully modern.

During the Prophet Mohamed’s time, Islam brought with it a fierce egalitarianism—calling the faithful to free slaves and put away tribal allegiances—which was all the more striking considering the cultural backdrop of seventh-century Arabia. Although this would later change, the selection process for community leaders was consensus-based and nonhereditary—not quite democracy but not quite absolute monarchy either. Even on issues like women’s rights, the Prophet—armed with God’s speech—pushed important changes, banning the practice of female infanticide and guaranteeing women the right to own property and earn their own income. On economic issues, the practice of zakat, or mandated charity, redistributed income from rich to poor. In a premodern version of social security, the early caliphate’s public treasury provided a stipend to elderly citizens who could no longer work. Meanwhile, the lack of a church or formal clergy allowed for direct access to God and individual agency. One could, for example, choose among different religious scholars and different legal schools of thought, or madhabs. Finally, as an overarching framework, the very notion of sharia—which bound ruler and ruled alike (at least in theory)—provided something resembling what we would today call “rule of law.” The caliph could not claim unlimited sovereignty. That belonged to God and God alone.

All of these elements—which, again, can be traced back to Islam’s founding moment and the conduct of the Prophet himself—aren’t wholly removed from how people today talk about equality, egalitarianism, and democratic decision making. As Cook notes, “Where the Islamic heritage stands apart is in providing a compelling parallel to European egalitarianism. Without question this has been one of the most attractive features of this heritage under modern conditions, a source of almost lyrical inspiration to leading Islamists.”23

While Enlightenment notions of equality, fraternity, individualism, and citizenship were no doubt attractive to many in the Middle East, including even Islamists, Muslims were never compelled to choose between their own tradition and another. Islam was flexible enough to incorporate, or even embrace, such ideas and retroactively give them an Islamic imprimatur so as to calm any fears over “authenticity.” Where Islamists were at pains to justify their use of the word “democracy,” they could point to a rich Islamic tradition of shura, or consensus. Democracy, then, could be marketed as updating or repackaging something that was already rooted in the Islamic heritage. The influential Islamist ideologue Sayyid Qutb—better known for his late-career radicalism—could write a book called Social Justice in Islam, essentially arguing for something resembling socialism but with a strong Islamic flavor. The same could be done for democracy (“Islamic democracy”) or capitalism (“Islamic Calvinism”).24 But what about Islam and the nation-state? Could they ever truly be compatible, when the caliphate had, for centuries, implied a transnational community of believers that paid little heed to borders? Here, too, there was an answer.


A Reformation and Its Discontents

When Martin Luther nailed his ninety-five theses to the wall of a Wittenberg church, Christianity must have appeared just as politically vital as Islam seems today, infusing every aspect of public and private life across Western Europe. If we had been alive then, the same questions asked about Islam would have been asked of Christianity, about its entanglements with politics and power and whether it could ever make peace with a secular order. Christianity eventually receded from political life in ways that no one would have thought possible. In hindsight, we can say that Christianity failed in its bid to hold secularism at bay. Many, of course, would view this positively as evidence of Christianity’s modern sensibilities and ability to adapt, but it still raises the question of whether such a dramatic shift was inevitable.

As political theology, Christianity could not marshal the will, the ability, or the resources to mount an effective challenge to secularization. In Europe, official Christianity basically conceded defeat, accepting, however grudgingly, its diminished status. There was little choice in the matter. Too many people had turned against the very idea of religion playing a central, organizing role in public life. Here, though, it is worth taking a step back. To understand how secularism triumphed in Europe—and why the same process is unlikely to take hold in the Middle East—we have to look more closely at the rise and fall of Christian politics.

As we saw earlier, Jesus had little to say about political power in this world. Christianity, unlike Islam, was a minority religion for centuries after Jesus’s death. Early Christians had assumed that their savior would be returning imminently. Until then, as a matter of practical necessity, Christians could do little more than accept rule by others. Naturally, as Christians grew in number and influence, other considerations came to the fore. The Roman emperor Constantine converted to Christianity in the fourth century, which not only ended the persecution of Christians in the vast empire but also raised, for the first time, the question of what Christians could and should do with political authority.

Christians were compelled to think more seriously about the practice of politics, even if they had little to draw on from the lives of Jesus and his disciples. What resulted was a kind of improvisation that depended on local context and culture. Such efforts were complicated by the fact that Christianity was still busy establishing its foundational tenets well into the fourth century, most famously at the Council of Nicaea. The responsibilities of power were accepted not because a positive vision for what to do with it existed but because the other options were worse. Politics was embraced, with some trepidation at first. As Gregory writes, the alternative of political passivity would mean “a hydra-headed cupiditas”—signifying here avarice and prideful power—receiving “unrestrained sanction by default.”25 The ambivalence would persist. In the words of the historian Peter Brown, “power was redeemed.”26 But the word “redeem” here suggests that the pursuit of power was not necessarily a natural, welcome enterprise for the Christ-loving believer. As Saint Augustine wrote in his masterwork City of God, the city of man and the city of God, though they inevitably overlapped, were separate, and they were sometimes even portrayed as walled cities in opposition. The gap could not be erased, and, more important, it wasn’t meant to be erased.27 These influential strains of Christian theology—emphasizing dualism and even “separation”—could lead to passivity where the temporal world, with its mundane politics, was accepted as the fallen realm of sin. As one leading scholar of Protestantism, John Witte, Jr., writes, “This apostolic ideal of separationism found its strongest and most enduring institutional form in monasticism, which produced a vast archipelago of communities of spiritual brothers and sisters, each walled off from the world around them.”28 This early ambivalence over temporal rule was less surprising than it otherwise might have been. After all, “render unto Caesar what is his and to God what is God’s” suggests separation between realms of activity but doesn’t specify what is God’s and what is Caesar’s.

With the Papal Revolution, beginning in the eleventh century, the church’s influence and political reach grew considerably under the “two swords” doctrine, where temporal and spiritual authority, however distinct, would be wielded in tandem in the service of Christendom and Christianity. With more land, riches, and political privilege, there were, inevitably, more abuses. With the church becoming ever more pervasive in the everyday lives of believers, those abuses became increasingly difficult to ignore. One notable example was the practice of clerical concubinage, which “was so widespread in parts of Germany and Switzerland that bishops profited from the practice by selling pardons of the offense.”29

The church, powerful as ever, may not have provided an easy target for the disenchanted, but it provided a clear one. To the extent that Christians were angry, their anger could be directed at the one, dominant church. Well before the Reformation, the Spiritual Franciscans faced persecution for deeming the pope “the antichrist,” a prelude to the intense passions aroused by the Reformation and then, predictably, the Counter-Reformation. The church provided a rallying point for all those who had lost faith in its authority, but a problem soon became apparent. If the church and all of its elaborate pomp and power had obscured Jesus’s truth, then it made sense to go back to the word of God. The question that the Dutch humanist Erasmus faced was one that Luther and a long line of reformers would have to contend with. As Diarmaid MacCulloch writes in his seminal history of Christianity, “Did the Bible contain all sacred truth? Or was there a tradition which the Church guarded, independent of it?”30

The Bible, by itself, could only go so far. As we saw earlier, the New Testament—and Jesus—had relatively little to say about governance. The tension between the two kingdoms, that of God and that of man, was left unresolved. Not only that, the question of authorship and transmission of scripture was far from clear-cut. The Bible, then, was not necessarily strong enough to provide the sole foundation for a new Christianity, as reformers like Luther initially hoped it would. In The Unintended Reformation, Brad Gregory offers a fascinating, revisionist account of the resulting fallout, and how it paved the way for Europe’s secularization. “Against the intentions of its protagonists,” he writes, “the Reformation ended more than a thousand years of Christianity as a framework for shared intellectual life in the Latin West.”31

The Reformation—so often associated with the liberal sensibilities that would later define Europe—was neither peaceful nor liberal. It was an intensely violent process and unleashed a wave of unabashed puritanism. It brought about what Witte calls “the rapid deconstruction of law, politics and society.”32 The fact that there were Lutherans and Calvinists—but also Anglicans, Anabaptists, Mennonites, and so forth—suggests the scale of difficulty in fashioning coherent alternatives to Catholicism (Luther once remarked that the Protestant reformer Zwingli was more astray than even the pope, which, considering Luther’s antipathy toward the church, is quite remarkable).33 It was easy to be unified in opposition to the Catholic Church; it was much more difficult to agree on what should replace it. Protestants didn’t just disagree on some things. They disagreed about a lot of things, including fundamental matters of doctrine:

They disagreed about the meaning and prioritization of biblical texts, and the relationship of those texts to doctrines regarding the sacraments, worship, grace, the church, and so forth. They disagreed about the broad interpretative principles that ought to guide the understanding of scripture, such as the relationship between the Old and New Testaments or the permissibility of religious practices not explicitly prohibited or enjoined in the Bible. They disagreed about the relationship among the interpolation of scripture, the exercise of reason, and God’s influence in the hearts of individual Christians. And they disagreed about whether (and if so, to what extent) explicit, substantive truth claims were even important to being a Christian.34

As became apparent over time, there was simply no resolution to these differences. More and more sects and denominations appeared. The arguments persisted. Within a generation of Luther’s Ninety-Five Theses, the Reformation had split into four principal branches, and interpretations on key theological questions would continue to proliferate.35 Because basic doctrine had been called into doubt and undermined over centuries of intense disagreement and even war, Christianity increasingly struggled to offer a framework for understanding the natural world, law, and politics. Christianity, as a worldview, had succumbed to confusion. Reason, science, and secular approaches to knowledge came to be seen as offering more clarity and consistency on the animating questions of man’s relationship to the world around him. Moreover, in order to maintain social peace, political systems needed to find a way to accommodate a seemingly irreversible doctrinal pluralism. No one group, party, or denomination in the doctrinal debate had enough people or power to realize its own particular conception of the good. It was a long, uneven process, but in the end, it wasn’t that Christianity lost the battle with secularism but more that it simply couldn’t win.

This didn’t necessarily mean that religion was doomed to irrelevance. Although that may have increasingly been the case in Europe, religion in the United States flourished, in part because so many different—and sometimes competing—strains of Christian practice were able to coexist. In this sense, secularism and religious observance went hand in hand. As long as certain constitutional limits were respected, individuals and groups could be as fundamentalist as they wanted. They could promote their religious values through the political process, if not on the national level, then at least at the local and state levels, where abortion could be restricted and the teaching of creationism mandated. It was the state’s job not to suppress religious sentiment, as in France and some other European countries, but to protect it and allow sufficient freedom for its expression.

Scholars have likened the American religious landscape to an economic marketplace, in which a wide array of mostly Protestant groups compete with each other over individual “consumers.” The product is religion, and, given the nature of competition and the laws of supply and demand, groups must be willing to innovate and improve their “product.” In the analogy, instead of restricting or otherwise controlling the supply of religion, the state ensures a free market. The marketplace approach is good for pluralism, because churches have incentives to cater to assorted personal religious tastes. Interestingly, the marketplace may benefit “strict” churches more than others. Strictness, writes Laurence Iannaccone, “increases commitment, raises levels of participation, and enables a group to offer more benefits to current and potential members.”36 Another way of looking at this is that, in a busy marketplace, churches have to find ways to distinguish themselves, and signaling “strictness” can do just that. In sum, if there is a demand for a niche product, then someone in the religious marketplace is likely to emerge to supply it. While this may be a boon for individual consumers—who are likely to find something that satisfies whatever religious idiosyncrasy they might have—it makes forging a shared sense of public morality more challenging.

* * *

WHILE RETURNING TO the first and ultimate source—whether the Bible or the Quran—has always provided a certain kind of fascination for the faithful, it opens a whole set of thorny questions. What about those things on which scripture is silent? Who interprets the text? What is the role of theologians, preachers, and clerics? If the answer is that each person accesses the text on his or her own, then what happens when these individuals—reading the same text—disagree with each other on the most basic of questions?

Doctrinal dilemmas, of course, didn’t stop the ever-expanding list of Protestant sects and denominations from trying to establish new Christian communities and “states.” They did so with the enthusiasm (and sometimes fanaticism) of the newly converted, which only sharpened the divides not just between Catholics and Protestants but also within Protestantism itself. Calvinists and other Protestant groups had relatively little use for rites and instead focused their efforts on promoting public morality and imposing social discipline.37 Such endeavors were often dependent on the sheer force of personality of early Protestant revolutionaries like John Calvin and Oliver Cromwell, a Puritan who briefly reigned as lord protector of the Commonwealth of England from 1653 to 1658. In his seminal history of Calvinism, Philip Benedict writes that under Calvin’s leadership, Geneva became “a model of the successful reformation of manners and morals.”38 Moral policing required a certain intensity, something that early reformers had in spades. For Zwingli, Christian life was akin to “a battle so sharp and full of danger that effort can nowhere be relaxed without loss.”39 Efforts to enforce moral discipline ranged from the obvious (punishing sexual deviance) to the odd (making Bibles available at pubs to encourage spiritual reflection).40 The unacceptably large gap between professions of faith and sinful behavior was one of the persistent Protestant critiques of the Catholic clergy. Bringing outward conduct in line with inward faith was what reformers like Calvin hoped to achieve.

Meanwhile, the Catholic Church, while irrevocably shaken, retained its dominance in much of Europe. Here, too, various experiments in fusing religion and politics were embraced enthusiastically by Catholic partisans but to mixed effect. In their different ways, Catholicism and Protestantism were bound to face growing—and ultimately unresolvable—challenges in maintaining religious states, particularly with the pull of modernity growing stronger. Within the Christian tradition, there was no equivalent of Islamic law—an accumulated corpus of law concerned with governance and the regulation of social and political affairs. More broadly, as Cook writes, Christianity was characterized by the “absence of any project of state formation.”41 At some level, it is foolish to even attempt the comparison, since “law” was not, in a very basic sense, what Christianity was supposed to be about. It is little surprise, then, that Martin Luther did not view the law, as expressed in the Old Testament, in a particularly positive light. As MacCulloch notes, “The opposition of Law and Gospel, an opposition set up by God himself, remained a fundamental theme of [Luther’s] theology.”42 To the extent that this tension was built into post-Reformation Christianity, there could be no resolution. Needless to say, this presented a rather fundamental obstacle when it came to religiously inspired state building. And this was why there were Lutherans, Zwinglians, and Calvinists, all named after individuals.43 In the absence of a widely accepted legal tradition that could be called upon for setting parameters of governance, the distinctive, sometimes idiosyncratic, vision of charismatic leaders mattered all the more.

Within Catholicism, the importance—and even the very existence—of canon law presents a similar dilemma. Canon law is essentially the system of rules and regulations for executing the church’s mission. At least at first, much of it was formulated during periods when Christianity was removed from power, with little prospect of gaining it. Naturally, this body of law was primarily oriented toward running a vast, hierarchical institution. In this sense, while canon law became increasingly political and politicized, particularly after the Papal Revolution, it cannot be compared with the sharia, which is, in part, law derived directly from God’s speech rather than merely inspired by him. (The large portion of Islamic law that is based on prophetic sayings is not “revealed” in the technical sense, but considering that God, in the Quran, guarantees the integrity of the prophetic model, it cannot easily be dismissed).

Without an “intrinsically Christian conception of the state,” to use Cook’s rendering,44 church officials, naturally, promoted church building over state building. The church tended to advance policies that expanded its privilege and maintained its control over the religious and moral sphere. The church, then, became both the means and the end—to the dismay of those calling for reform.

There was a growing sense among reformers like Martin Luther—who started out as committed Catholics—that the church simply could not be salvaged. Later, in the post-Reformation era, the church would misplay its hand during the dawn of mass politics, further alienating Catholics. The tumult of the nineteenth century is worth considering at some length, since it underscores the doomed proposition of Catholic politics in an age of secularization. From the very beginning, the church viewed modernity and various associated ideologies with suspicion. Socialists who condemned religion as “the opiate of the masses” were demanding their rights, taking to the streets, and forming revolutionary parties. The church, on the other hand, was a status quo power that had long employed religion as a means of social control in the service of a hierarchical social order. All too often, clerics preached a kind of economic fatalism and political passivity in the face of urban alienation, mass poverty, and terrible working conditions. In Belgium, where Catholic conservatives were particularly powerful throughout the nineteenth century, the church “sternly identified itself with the oppressor.”45 “The Church’s contempt for the worker,” writes the eminent Belgian historian Els Witte, “was visible in the religious burial ceremony, which perpetuated social inequality in death.”46 Before the advent of civil burials (another modern phenomenon we take for granted), the church effectively controlled the most intimate moments of a person’s life, those of birth and death. How to die became a key battleground between the religious and secular, stoking considerable outrage and opposition. As Witte notes, “It was the last show of contempt for any non-religious citizen when his burial in a graveyard was denied on the grounds that it would desecrate the site.”47

Making matters worse, the fear of socialists and their ilk went hand in hand with a fear of democracy. It is difficult to imagine now, but in nineteenth-century Europe the right to vote was generally restricted to property owners (often in tandem with religious, gender, and ethnic restrictions). Electoral taxes could limit the franchise to as little as 1 percent of the population. Expanding suffrage meant that the working poor—the core constituency of socialist parties—could swing elections to the left. The masses, empowered by democratization, were something to be feared. This generally put the church and the Catholic parties it backed on the wrong side of one of the most consequential debates of the era. It was yet another losing battle that the church insisted on fighting. At their most radical, Catholic conservatives were nearly feudal in their antimodernism. The far-right Ultramontanes of Belgium, for example, agitated for a Christian state under the pope’s direct control with “a medieval class structure” to boot.48

That the church lacked a coherent conception of law, governance, and state building was one thing. But what doomed it was the inability to come to terms with a rapidly changing Europe, where the old foundations of social order were coming under direct assault. Here, the church’s inflexibility was striking. Modernity’s full and rather diverse array of political options—whether ideologies such as socialism and liberalism or political systems such as democracy—were opposed outright rather than assimilated.

* * *

MANY MUSLIM THINKERS, FROM radicals like Sayyid Qutb to reformists like Syed Attas, have written about Christianity as fundamentally dualistic, spiritual, ascetic, and otherworldly.49 Though these writers disagreed profoundly on a whole range of issues, they shared a common interest in emphasizing Islam’s uniqueness during a time of cultural encroachment and imperial domination. The assertion of Islam became a distinctly political act, and not just—or even primarily—a theological one: The Muslim world may have found itself weak and subjugated, but, at the very least, here was one thing that the colonial powers couldn’t take away. Islam was better, truer, more vibrant, and unwavering in the face of those who sought to reduce it to a mere religion. It retained an uncompromised power and “purity” that no other major religion could claim. In this way, Christianity presented itself as an appropriate and even easy foil.

Christianity may appear decidedly “otherworldly” today, but it would be a mistake to project secularism’s recent triumphs on the preceding period—running from the seventeenth to the early twentieth century—of religious violence and rather vigorous attempts to fuse religion with politics. There was a time, not too long ago, when secularists would have lost faith, resigning themselves to a world where the church appeared immovable and Christianity imbued itself, endlessly, in daily life (and death). What seemed impossible then came to pass more quickly than they (and for that matter, the church) could have imagined. The argument, then, isn’t that Christianity, whether in its Catholic or Protestant varieties, is apolitical or uniquely “secular.” Christianity was quite political. This posture, however, was unsustainable, for the many reasons already discussed—Jesus’s “prophetic” model, the legacy of the early Christian community, the nature and role of Christian scripture, and the absence of any positive conception of divinely mandated governance.

Where a political Christianity had failed, a political—and politicized—Islam could succeed. While many Islamic intellectuals looked at Christianity with skepticism, or worse, many—and sometimes they were the same people—also drew inspiration from its Protestant variants, arguing that Islam had inspired the Reformation. Martin Luther was portrayed as a sort of “latter-day Muslim,” someone who had washed away Catholicism’s sins and decadence and restored the power and purity of original scripture.50 The preeminent Islamic modernist of his time, Mohamed Abduh, saw his own project of reform as continuing in that spirit. Jamal al-Din al-Afghani, often mentioned in the same breath as Abduh, argued that Europe had progressed “from barbarism to civilization” because of “the religious movement raised and spread by Luther.”51 Not surprisingly, then, while Luther might have been a latter-day Muslim, Afghani fashioned himself a modern-day Luther.

In the light of recent years and decades—with the Middle East an apparently unceasing source of religious conflict and fanaticism—it is easy to overlook what came before. In the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, the region underwent a wide-ranging and often fascinating process of reform and modernization. To the extent that the Middle East today seems hopelessly violent, it is a product of, rather than a precursor to, modernization. As we will see, this process was for both better and worse, but in ways that may not seem obvious at first. It also offers a useful reminder to be careful what you wish for. Reform doesn’t necessarily lead to reformation. Good things don’t necessarily go together.





