4. The Muslim Brotherhood: From Reform to Revolution


The Muslim Brotherhood eschewed revolution. They were the ultimate gradualists. But the Arab Spring would show, yet again, that however careful and cautious they were, a fundamental divide remained. That gap—over the role of religion and the nature of the state—was deepened with the Brotherhood’s unlikely rise to power in 2012, when Mohamed Morsi became Egypt’s first democratically elected president. For the first time, the prospect of prolonged Islamist rule became more than just a theoretical consideration, provoking considerable fear among Egypt’s economic and political elites. And so they took action and worked with the military to unseat the Brotherhood—this time, they hoped, once and for all.

The weeks and months leading to Morsi’s demise will forever be remembered in a haze. This is the haze of nostalgia, tragedy, hatred, and, of course, hindsight. This makes it all the more important to try to remember things as they really were. And that is where we can begin our story of the Brotherhood’s unlikely transformation from plodding gradualists into budding, if not entirely convincing, revolutionaries. Mohamed Morsi was many things—incompetent, polarizing, and profoundly uncharismatic—but a radical wasn’t one of them. There was little doubt that the Brotherhood had veered to the right during its brief time in power. Yet the real debate in the organization, at least after the fact, was whether it had veered far enough. Where those outside the Islamist fold argued that Morsi had overreached, Muslim Brotherhood supporters often made the opposite argument—that the president was too deferential to the state and that he should have used his powers more, not less, aggressively.

From the day Mubarak fell, whenever the Brotherhood had a choice between reform or revolution, they chose the former. They wagered that it was better to avoid direct confrontation with the military, long considered the guardian of the Egyptian state. This meant sometimes turning a blind eye to the army’s disastrous management of the transition period. Even when the military and judicial establishment threatened hard-won gains—such as with the dissolution of the democratically elected parliament—the Brotherhood may have talked tough but it ultimately abided by the decision. It would push, but only up to a point.

Once he assumed the presidency, Morsi—described by those close to him as “doing things by the book”—opted to work within the state apparatus rather than fight it, at least at first.1 Even his most dramatic move a month into his tenure—forcing the retirement of military chiefs Hussein Tantawi and Sami al-Annan—was relatively restrained. At the height of his powers and popularity, there was no real purging or restructuring of the army. Tantawi’s replacement was none other than Abdel Fattah al-Sissi, another creature of Egypt’s bloated military—and its spymaster to boot.

Morsi’s goal was to slowly solidify power and gradually wrest control from Egypt’s labyrinthine bureaucracy. The longer Morsi stayed in power, the thinking went, the more state institutions would come to accept him. The thinking was wrong. Brotherhood leaders allowed their earnestness and naïveté to color some of their most consequential decisions. To be sure, they could play hard-nosed Chicago-style politics with the best of them, but they were also products of a religious movement whose basic premise was that change began at the individual level. The founder of the Muslim Brotherhood, Hassan al-Banna, believed that even skeptics could be won over to the cause if Brotherhood members held themselves up as models of moral and ethical conduct. When Brothers tell the stories of why they joined, there’s usually that one person with exceptional charisma and character who showered them with attention at the mosque or at school, introducing them to Banna’s writings and bringing them into a circle of friendship and solidarity.

Sissi was thought to be a prime candidate for this kind of religious outreach. After all, he was devout, praying five times a day and even observing special supplementary fasts on Mondays and Thursdays. He often prayed with Morsi and other Brotherhood leaders. Intellectually, Sissi appeared to be sympathetic to aspects of Islamist thought. When Sissi attended the U.S. Army War College in Carlisle, Pennsylvania, he submitted a thesis in which he argued that the West should respect the outcomes of democratic elections in which Islamist parties come to power.2 “The challenge that exists,” he writes, “is whether the rest of the world will be able to accept a democracy in the Middle East founded on Islamic beliefs.”3

Morsi and the Brotherhood’s hope in Sissi says more perhaps about them than it does about Sissi. They believed that to truly be a good Muslim meant to be a good Islamist: If someone was devout and took the Quran seriously, they would, in due time and with the right amount of exposure to the Brotherhood’s message, come to see the good in what the movement had to offer. These weren’t professional politicians. Sometimes Brotherhood leaders acted more like preachers who had the good fortune of enjoying (some) political power. When it came to their relationship with Sissi, this was a profound miscalculation.

In politics as in preaching, Morsi and the Brotherhood believed in moving slowly. They remained the calculating gradualists they had always been. Considering what they were up against—a massive, unwieldy state and an old regime establishment that had little interest in giving way—there was always the question, an almost philosophical one, of whether a slow and steady approach could ever really succeed. Take, for example, what Morsi’s team had to contend with upon entering the presidential palace. According to one senior Morsi aide, the palace’s wireless network was initially unsecured and could even be accessed outside palace grounds. As he recounted to me just months before the coup: “When we first got in, they gave us handwritten notes rather than proper permits [for entry]. What does that tell you?”4

It is a fascinating thing to speak to Brotherhood figures, particularly those who were in government during those final, fateful days of the Morsi presidency. “What happened is still like a black box to this day,” one Brotherhood activist turned Morsi staffer told me more than a year and a half after the coup.5 A senior advisor to Morsi—who continued to refer to his former boss simply as “the president”—acknowledged the confusion surrounding the Morsi-Sissi relationship. “We had strategy meetings in February, March, April [2013] in which we specifically identified Sissi as the mover behind what we called the conspiracy,” he told me. “And so frankly I don’t understand the discrepancy.” One common interpretation, shared by this advisor, was that Morsi “had this kind of obsession that people can’t handle bad news.”6 He didn’t want to cause any panic, so he continued to insist until his very last moments as president that even if the others turned against him, Sissi wouldn’t. We may not know—at least until, or if, he is released from prison—just what Morsi really believed. But one thing is clear enough. Whether or not Morsi knew better is almost beside the point. Because of his aversion to conflict, his deference to the military, and his desire to work within the state apparatus, he never seriously confronted Sissi or other top military officers in those final days and weeks, despite gathering evidence that something wasn’t quite right. This was the way Morsi—and the Brotherhood—did business. The spirit of revolution, or even merely a persuasive appropriation of it, was beyond them. This caution led to considerable frustration, particularly among the group’s younger activists, who hadn’t been chastened by long years of imprisonment and abuse.


The End of an Experiment

It may be one of the most remarkable political rants ever caught on Egyptian television. The day before the July 3, 2013 coup, opposition activist Ehab al-Khouli launched into a vociferous diatribe when asked about Morsi’s final televised speech as president. “This ‘former’ president is addicted to his throne,” he screamed, gesturing wildly. “This man is a liar and a deceiver.”7 He gasped for breath and doubled over, coughing, as the talk show host pleaded with him to calm down. But he continued—beating the table, jumping out of his chair—for nearly four minutes.

Khouli, in rather stark form, captured the anger and frustration of the millions of Egyptians who took to the streets during the June 30 protests. For many, democracy was not simply a matter of faith, or even principle, but a means to something else: a sense of dignity, the promise of economic benefit, or the freedom to dress and think as they wished. The sense that democracy had failed to bring real gains set in motion the breakdown of political order, the return of the generals, and the overthrow of Egypt’s first democratically elected president.

The problem with coups is that far from resolving conflicts, they tend to exacerbate them. A coup in a country as polarized as Egypt was almost certain to lead to dueling and ultimately irreconcilable legitimacies: the legitimacy of the ballot box and the legitimacy of the street. Considering its own history of persecution, the Brotherhood was unlikely to back down in the face of the army’s threats. The events of 1954 loomed large in movement lore. As Wael Haddara, a Canadian-Egyptian advisor to Morsi, explained to me,

I think what Morsi was actually counting on isn’t that Sissi was going to [stand down] out of the goodness of his heart or a set of principles or whatever. I think Morsi was counting on having conveyed to the army several times that if this happens, we’re not going to back down. This isn’t going to be like 1954 where people just go home.8

In late 1954, Nasser quickly moved against the Brotherhood, decapitating the leadership, which offered little resistance. Hundreds of thousands of members and supporters stood on alert, but they never received the call to mobilize. Plunged into disarray, the hope was that a dangerous confrontation could be avoided, a hope that appeared naive in retrospect.

This time around, the Brotherhood mobilized before the coup actually happened, directing supporters to gather in two key areas in Cairo. From late June until August 14, tens of thousands of Morsi supporters, including entire families, basically lived in Rabaa, the larger of the two encampments. The first time I set foot in Rabaa, just a week before the August 14 massacre, I was surprised at how self-contained everything was. You couldn’t just casually stroll in. You had to enter it. At the makeshift entrance, about fifty feet off the street, the volunteer guards, standing next to piled-up sandbags, hurriedly checked IDs. As I walked in, people sprayed me with water. This, apparently, was their way of welcoming me. It was August, at the peak of the humid Egyptian summer. Like many Egyptian protests, this one teetered somewhere between panic and jubilation.

More than a protest, Rabaa was an alternative city with kitchens, pharmacies, food stalls, sleeping quarters, and a “media center.” That tens of thousands of people were gathered in the middle of Cairo in such outward defiance offered a constant reminder of the fact that there were now two Egypts. Rabaa, in what it claimed and what it stood for, was only the latest—and most striking—manifestation of a foundational divide that had seemingly grown larger with time. Here, in the heart of Cairo, was a ministate, where the Egyptian authorities had no jurisdiction. Something had to give.

After the massacre in which more than eight hundred were killed, a powerful mythology developed around Rabaa. Rabaa is where these young men and women came of age. Like the Prophet and his companions more than fourteen centuries ago, they were ready and willing to sacrifice for the cause, for Islam, and for God. As the standoff with the army persisted, the feeling of unity and even joy joined uneasily with fear, as the rumors of military action swirled among the protesters. This alternative universe that they had created was about to come under attack. Rabaa was where young Muslim Brothers, some of them still in college, told me of that mix of adrenaline and dread as they drafted their wills and bid their families good-bye.

With the dispersal of Rabaa, a new phase began, as Brotherhood members and leaders—at least the ones who weren’t in prison—tried to make sense of an Egypt they no longer recognized. They had, of course, experienced repression before. This, though, was different. Many Egyptians supported Hosni Mubarak, but it was difficult to find anyone who was particularly passionate about him. Mubarak was the serviceable strongman—steady, solid, and devoid of charisma. As repressive as Mubarak could be, he had little interest in eradicating the Brotherhood altogether. That would have required a combination of brutality and ambition that Mubarak lacked. Sissi, however, was not lacking in such ambition. He had a messianic streak that can only be described as bizarre. In a leaked off-the-record interview, for instance, he tells his confidant Yasser Rizk that thirty-five years ago he started having dreams, like one in which he raised “a sword with ‘There is no God but God’ written on it in red.”9 In another, a voice comes to Sissi, saying, “We will give to you what we have given no other.”10 In still another, he is with the late Egyptian president Anwar el-Sadat. Sadat says that he knew he would one day become president. Sissi replies, “And I know that I will be president of the republic.”11 In public, Sissi presented himself as a savior who would “maximize” state power to pull the Egyptian people—“the light of his eyes”—from their sorry state. He traded his beatific, paternal tone in private. “People think I’m a soft man. Sissi is torture and suffering,” he once told a journalist.12

Sissi was a dictator, but he was a popular one, especially in the beginning. An occasionally odd cult of personality built up around the new leader. In a colorful column, one female journalist said that if Sissi wanted her as a concubine she was more than happy to oblige.13 A state-owned newsmagazine featured thirty smiling Sissis on its cover, all wearing different clothes—doctors, engineers, laborers—with the words “All of Egypt is Sissi” emblazoned at the top. Soon, there would be Sissi-themed pajamas for women featuring the general himself, sporting dark sunglasses.14

Often, Sissi was criticized for not being repressive enough, including in the lead-up to the Rabaa massacre. Millions of pro-coup Egyptians wondered why it was taking Sissi so long to act. When he finally did, they cheered on the dispersals and the killings, encouraged by the nonstop demonization of the Brotherhood in the state and private media. Egypt’s savior had delivered. Rarely had celebrity been so inseparable from brutality.

It was frightening to watch people you knew and even loved get caught up in what can only be described as mass hysteria. The weekend before the army moved in, I went to Egypt’s north coast to visit family, hoping to escape, even if for a moment, the fear, anger, and polarization consuming Cairo. Sitting by the beach, a relative performed a morbid demonstration, pointing to the coffee table in front of him and chopping his hand down on it. The table shook. He said he wanted the severed heads of each of the Brotherhood’s top leaders right there on the table, listing them each by name. I knew he was half-joking, performing a kind of theater of the absurd. However, another relative, my well-educated and sensible uncle, was deadly serious. He took to his Facebook page to publicly call for the execution of Muslim Brotherhood members without due process.

After the ashes settled, there was the challenge of making sense of what had happened. Again, there was no precedent in the days of Mubarak or, for that matter, Nasser. The protesters at Rabaa had seen their friends shot and killed. And yet there wasn’t any mass outpouring of sympathy, at least not in public. They struggled to understand how so many of their countrymen could turn against them, including their own loved ones. This was not old-fashioned sectarianism, where different groups lived among themselves in geographic cantons, oblivious to the other’s humanity. One Islamist journalist, who soon fled to Doha, recounted how her father turned against her: “My dad now calls me a terrorist—and he means it.”15 These stories have become all too common: friends, family, and neighbors turning against each other. Ominously, in a throwback to an older era, neighbors and colleagues informed on each other. The wall of fear, which had apparently crumbled during the Arab uprisings, was now being rebuilt—and the wall, if anything, was stronger. On his Facebook page, activist Abdel Rahman Zaidan recounted an experience he had on a Cairo bus. A middle-aged woman had launched into a diatribe against Sissi. A young man sitting next to her enthusiastically joined in. Suddenly, as the bus passed a church, the woman asked the bus driver to stop, stuck her head out the window, and shouted to the church guards that a “Muslim Brother terrorist” was on the bus with her. The guard immediately boarded the bus, dragged the young man off, and began beating him. As the bus drove on, its passengers “amazed,” the female informer looked at her fellow passengers and said with pride as if daring them to oppose her, “Oh God, let this country be cleansed!”16

In another incident, journalist Sara Khorshid recounted sitting in a Cairo café, where she was casually chatting about politics with Alain Gresh, editor of the French newspaper Le Monde diplomatique. A fifty-something veiled woman, who was apparently eavesdropping, shouted that they were “ruining the country” and proceeded to inform the police officers outside. “The woman who informed on us looked like any average Egyptian woman—like my mother or my neighbors.… She sounded angry and sincere,” writes Khorshid. “I’ve seen many like her in the past months, even in my own circle—ordinary people who really believe they are serving their country by doubting the loyalty of fellow citizens.”17


Reform or Revolution?

After a failed stint in government, a coup, and a massacre, it was time to take stock. It was clear that the Brotherhood would change in important ways, not necessarily because it wanted to but because it had to. What, though, would that change look like? Crises, especially unexpected ones, force a process of political learning. But just because lessons are learned doesn’t mean they’re the right ones. As we saw earlier, the Brotherhood did, in fact, learn something from the trials of 1954: When threatened with eradication, don’t stand down. Applied to the events of 2013, however, this approach only served to compound a growing list of errors.

In the early months after the July 3 coup, the Brotherhood’s leaders seemed to be in a daze, repeating empty statements about impending victory. It was just a matter of months, maybe a year at most, before the coup would “break.” With so many killed, many more in prison or in hiding, and others organizing weekly, even daily, protests, it wasn’t the right time to offer apologies or ideological revisions. It was a time to resist.

The vast majority of the Brotherhood’s first, second, and third-tier figures were arrested. By late 2014, there wasn’t a single senior leader inside Egypt who was still free. The leadership in exile, based in London, Doha, and Istanbul, stubbornly insisted on the language of politics, even after politics had ended. The president, the constitution, and the parliament needed to be reinstated, they said. “Legitimacy,” meaning here electoral legitimacy, was the watchword. There was little in the way of new, creative ideas. A series of strategy sessions, bringing together Islamists from various countries, was held in Istanbul in the fall of 2013. As one London-based Islamist figure recalled, “We sat with [Brotherhood secretary-general] Mahmoud Hussein for three days. They were still in a state of a shock a year into the coup. It’s fine to be in a daze for a month or two, but…”18

One of the more interesting ideas which emerged from the discussions was that in exchange for a return to democracy, the Brotherhood would withdraw from direct political participation for a set period of time. But such a radical proposal could not gain the support of the Brotherhood’s conservative old guard. The more forward-leaning members of the Brotherhood-led National Alliance for the Support of Legitimacy—which included the centrist Islamists of the Wasat Party, the reformed Salafis of the Watan Party, and the ex-jihadists of Gama’a Islamiya—grew increasingly frustrated, leading to the alliance’s effective collapse by the end of 2014.

Throughout its long, varied history, the Brotherhood remained a top-heavy, hierarchical organization. While there was significant decentralization and internal democracy on the local and regional levels, when it came to overall political strategy, the Brotherhood’s executive body, the Guidance Council, dominated. It made sense, then, to follow the public statements and initiatives coming out of Istanbul and Doha, looking for subtle shifts in direction or signs of dissent within the Brotherhood-led alliance. But the coup had punctured the old way of doing things. The real change was happening elsewhere.

* * *

THE SEEMING STASIS of the leadership in exile belied an increasingly fluid and volatile situation in the one place that mattered most. Inside Egypt, younger activists and university students were leading anticoup protests and demonstrations. They had to. There was no one else. Older Brotherhood leaders, after all, were imprisoned or in hiding. These realities created a new and fascinating dynamic—a dynamic that wasn’t directed or even really intended.

Brotherhood and other Islamist youth were acting first and thinking later. On the tactical level, this meant considerable improvisation. The more they were able to evade the security forces, the more their confidence grew. During a short-lived Arab Spring, the entire organizational infrastructure of the Brotherhood had become consumed by electoral politics, as hundreds of thousands of members entered into a phase of near-constant mobilization, working to get out the vote in five major elections (two referenda, parliamentary elections for the lower and upper house, as well as presidential polls). This led one prominent Egyptian liberal, who ran on the Brotherhood’s parliamentary list, to offer a backhanded compliment. “If you give the Brotherhood a piece of shit,” he told me, “they’ll ask: where is the electoral angle of the piece of shit.”19 Soon, he, like so many others, concluded he could no longer stay in Egypt, taking up self-imposed exile in the United States.

In the postcoup era, politics, in the normal sense of the word, lost its relevance. Few in the Brotherhood thought seriously of trying to contest elections under military rule. They had put their lives on the line and watched their friends die. After all of that, what would be the point of fighting for a few parliamentary seats in elections that would be anything but free and fair? “Politics” had become a battle of wills, waged on Egyptian streets and in Egyptian homes. In late 2013 and 2014, the repression intensified, as tens of thousands were arrested and hundreds of Islamist businesses and social-service organizations were shut down. After the Muslim Brotherhood was declared a terrorist organization in September 2013, the Cairo Court for Urgent Matters leaked a list of 1,142 social-service organizations and entities linked to the Muslim Brotherhood either directly or indirectly, as Steven Brooke details.20 The state immediately froze the assets of those organizations, as well as those of eighty-seven Brotherhood-affiliated schools. Prominent Muslim Brotherhood–affiliated organizations like the Islamic Medical Association, which had operated twenty-two hospitals and seven specialized-care centers across Egypt, gradually came under state control by 2015.21

For young Brothers who had come of age during the Mubarak era, the scale of repression was unprecedented. Yet, even as the regime moved to eradicate it, the Brotherhood’s new generation of de facto leaders—the ones actually organizing the marches and sit-ins—were able to sustain small but significant protests across the country. Contrary to claims that the Brotherhood organization had been decimated, the Brotherhood was able to maintain, at least initially, much of its traditional activities. In many parts of the country, Brotherhood “cells,” or usras, continued to meet; financial stipends were distributed to relatives of the imprisoned; and, in January 2015, internal elections were held. And at the forefront was a new generation of Islamist youth.

The shift from slow, gradual reform to confrontation, “revolution,” and even occasional violence wasn’t something they intellectualized until well after the fact. In those first months after the coup, whenever a Brotherhood figure would even so much as hint at offering concessions or entering into dialogue with proregime figures, the backlash was immediate and overwhelming. If, for example, the reinstatement of Morsi wasn’t explicitly mentioned in a public statement, activists would take to social media to attack leaders for betraying the revolution. As one senior Brotherhood official who sometimes found himself at the receiving end complained to me, “We have to be able to make concessions, but there’s always the concern that our base won’t be supportive.”22

When critics insisted that the Brotherhood learn from its mistakes and “evolve,” one doubts that becoming less gradualist is quite what they had in mind. In this new Egypt, compromise with the regime was tantamount to dishonoring the dead. There would be no pact with the military and other state institutions as there was after Mubarak fell on February 11, 2011. That day, the throngs of protesters gathered in Tahrir Square went home, thinking that victory was theirs after just eighteen days. The military assumed responsibility for the transition, a role that the Brotherhood readily accepted. For many in the movement’s younger ranks, this, at least in hindsight, was the original sin. Knowing what they knew now, it wouldn’t be enough to go back to July 2, 2013, the day before the military coup. They had to go all the way back to February 11, 2011, and embrace revolution in the fullest, total sense, before the Egyptian state co-opted it. They shouldn’t have gone home that night.

* * *

SISSI’S BRAND OF REPRESSION was the most dangerous kind—it was populist and popular. But, more than that, his campaign against the Brotherhood reflected the unity of the Egyptian state. In the first year after the coup, at least 2,500 civilians were killed and 17,000 wounded.23 By March 2015, security forces had arrested more than 40,000 people, the majority of them on grounds of suspected support for the Muslim Brotherhood, although leftist activists, journalists, and university students were also detained.24

One might have expected such high levels of repression—surpassing the darkest days of the Nasser era—to sow doubts within the regime and among allies and supporters. But when the military led, the rest of the Egyptian state followed, sometimes with over-the-top aplomb. There was the April 2014 sentencing to death of 529 Brotherhood members, one of the largest-ever mass death sentences anywhere in the world. The court seemed to make no pretense of transparency or fairness in the case: The attorneys of the accused were denied access to the “evidence,” and those who protested were threatened. The verdict was handed down after only two court sessions, each lasting less than an hour.25 In May 2015, the same court sentenced Mohamed Morsi for his alleged role in (his own) prison break during the 2011 uprising. The former president faced execution. More than a hundred others were sentenced alongside him. Morsi’s co-conspirators included a Palestinian man “who has been in an Israeli jail since 1996” and two Palestinians who had reportedly already died, writes Emad Shahin, a leading Egyptian political scientist who himself was handed a death sentence in absentia.26

Morsi’s death sentence came a year after Egypt’s courts had broken their own record, sentencing 683 people to death on April 28, 2014. The judiciary was a full and willing partner in the war against the Muslim Brotherhood. The courts were instrumental in first banning the Brotherhood and then declaring it a terrorist organization, seizing its financial assets and closing down hundreds of Islamist civil-society organizations. In shuttering hospitals, clinics, and charitable organizations affiliated with the Brotherhood, the government effectively cut off thousands of needy Egyptians.27 The crackdown extended to mosques: The Ministry of Endowments boycotted preachers not licensed through al-Azhar and instituted a license-renewal requirement to ensure that all preachers were vetted by the state.28 Some institutions, such as privately owned schools, were harder to bring to heel than others. But the regime used all the weapons in its arsenal. In January 2015, the Ministry of Education appointed new directors for every school owned by a Muslim Brotherhood–affiliated individual.29

As Nathan Brown and Michele Dunne write, “Under Nasser as well as Sadat and Mubarak … the judiciary sometimes acted as a brake on the government’s most authoritarian impulses. Now, all the instruments of the Egyptian state seem fully on board. Whereas Nasser had to go to the trouble of setting up kangaroo courts, today there is no need.”30 For the near entirety of the postindependence era, the army, judiciary, and religious establishment may have been politicized, but at least they offered the pretense of being above the fray, nurturing an illusion of independence and autonomy. (At its most assertive, the Egyptian judiciary became a focal point of opposition to the Mubarak regime in the mid-2000s.) That they were widely perceived as pillars of the state was due in part to Egypt’s relatively well-formed sense of nationhood. The idea of the Egyptian state, with its attendant bureaucratic largesse, predated Egyptian independence.

The military, in particular, enjoyed near universal respect, becoming something close to sacred. When the army stepped in and deposed Mubarak—one of their own—in February 2011, few Egyptians objected. Defying orders from Mubarak’s henchmen, the army refused to shoot into the crowds in Tahrir Square, burnishing its image of nonpartisanship. The chant that reverberated in the days leading up to Mubarak’s fall—“the army and the people are one hand”—was no accident. Even if it wasn’t quite true, it was the message the military brass fell back on over and over again: They represented no party or faction, they were dutiful servants of the nation, and they would guard over the interests of Egypt and Egypt alone. Even the Muslim Brotherhood, which had repeatedly fallen victim to the military’s manipulations, avoided direct criticism of the army. As one Morsi administration official reflected, looking back at that critical period, “Our reformist approach led to a self-interested pact with the military.”31 To oppose the military would be tantamount to advocating revolution, and, as we have seen, Brotherhood leaders had little interest in dismantling or purging the state. If they needed to place blame, they could direct it at individuals or policies, but not at institutions. There was no need to alienate state institutions when they hoped, one day, to win them over from within the democratic process. Why defeat the state when it could more easily be co-opted?

Even with the tumult of Morsi’s year in power, the military maintained the fiction of being above politics, despite mounting evidence to the contrary. As of May 2013, the army still enjoyed a 94 percent approval rating, according to a Zogby poll.32 While there were several clashes and even massacres during its stewardship of the transitional period, the military’s repression was, indeed, nonpartisan, targeting revolutionaries, soccer fans, Christians, and Islamists, and really anyone who threatened “stability.”

Al-Azhar, the country’s prestigious seat of Islamic learning, followed a similar path. During the democratic transition, it tried in seemingly good faith to bridge the gaps between Islamist and secular parties. At a series of meetings organized by al-Azhar’s Grand Imam Ahmed al-Tayyeb, the various parties endorsed a document in June 2011 establishing a “guiding framework” for the new constitution. The memorandum stressed democratic principles and a commitment to universal rights and freedom of worship, anchoring al-Azhar’s status as an influential state actor within the new Egypt.

Despite initial calls after the revolution for expanding al-Azhar’s autonomy from the state,33 since the coup it has functioned primarily as an instrument of the Sissi regime. Although uneasy with the Brotherhood’s political ambitions, al-Azhar avoided clashing with Morsi during his short time in office. Ahmed al-Tayyeb reluctantly backed the overthrow of Morsi, a move that he would later describe as deciding between “two bitter choices.”34 Ali Gomaa, Egypt’s grand mufti until February 2013, had less compunction, leading the rhetorical charge against the Brotherhood.35 In several sermons and promotional videos, he offered religious justifications for killing members of the Muslim Brotherhood. “When someone tries to divide you, then kill them,” he said in a video made for the military shortly after the Rabaa dispersal.36 “Blessed are those who kill them, and those who are killed by them,” added Gomaa. “We must cleanse our Egypt of this trash … they reek … God is with you, and the Prophet Mohamed is with you, and the believers are with you … [Oh God], may you destroy them.”37 Interestingly, Gomaa and other proregime clerics have employed the kind of takfirist reasoning usually associated with al-Qaeda and the Islamic State, arguing that Brotherhood members are akin to heretics and therefore their blood is licit.38 Gomaa, Steven Brooke writes, now leads what used to be the Brotherhood’s network of hospitals and clinics.39

This is yet another reason why the coup and the subsequent massacres (there were two others before Rabaa) would prove such a defining moment not just for Egypt but for the future trajectory of political Islam. State institutions had given up any pretense of neutrality. For the first time, the military—supported by all arms of the state, including the religious establishment—killed large numbers of Egyptian civilians from one particular political faction, in this case the Muslim Brotherhood and its allies. Once the Rabaa massacre happened, it had become, in a sense, too late. Too much blood had been spilled.


Accidental Leaders

The battle lines had been drawn more clearly than ever before. Muslim Brotherhood activists, perhaps hoping to find a silver lining in their ordeal, often cite this sense of clarity as a blessing of the coup. Gradualism doesn’t lend itself to black and white and good and evil. But revolution does. They see the state, at least in its current iteration, as an enemy to be undermined. When thinking about radicalization, we tend to focus on the use of violence. But, intellectually and philosophically, attitudes toward the state and how to change it often prove more important over time. Violence is, more often than not, about means. The state is about ends.

If you were a longtime Brotherhood leader, all you likely knew was the long game, and you were probably quite good at finding creative ways to avoid confrontation. Taking the regime head-on would only imperil hard-fought gains. As we saw in the previous chapter, the Brotherhood’s gradualism reflected a tacit understanding of sorts. In exchange for the Brotherhood’s steering clear of regime red lines—calling for revolution, undermining state institutions, and overperforming in elections—the authorities would tolerate limited Brotherhood activity in the social and educational realms. A leader in his fifties or sixties would have spent as many as forty years of his life immersed in the organization and its ideas. Shifting into a revolutionary gear would be difficult.

The Brotherhood figures who managed to escape had little choice. They were outside the country. The best they could do was offer general directives and then let local branches inside Egypt chart their own course, based on realities that they no longer were privy to. This led to a dynamic where the leadership in exile was best positioned not to lead but to follow. Traveling to and from international capitals, their role was to reflect on and convey what has happening on the ground. If they contradicted the revolutionary spirit of their activist base, they risked irrelevance or, worse, provoking a split in the organization. Steeped in the Brotherhood and having suffered through the ups and downs of repression, leaders prioritized organizational survival above all else. And the only way to maintain organizational coherence was to give wide latitude to a new cadre of young activists. A strategy oriented around continuous and confrontational protests may have been “revolutionary,” but, more important, it was good for morale. It gave Brotherhood members something to do and something to fight for. The alternative was going home, lying low, and waiting, which ran the risk of plunging the Brotherhood into irrelevance. As Steven Brooke writes, referring to this period of mobilization: “By demonstrating the organization’s strength, the Brotherhood is likely striving to convince the regime that they must be taken seriously, as an equal to be negotiated with rather than a minority to be exterminated.”40

For a new generation of activists in their twenties and thirties, protests were their training ground. Forced to improvise, evade detection, and outsmart the police, they developed new methods and, in the process, got a crash course in how to be leaders. If they needed to quickly change locations for a protest, they would use fireworks to simulate gunfire to frighten the police and then scurry away. If they wanted to post pictures of a human chain on social media or needed a record of the inevitable police brutality, select Brotherhood members would loiter on the margins and pretend they were against the Brotherhood, shouting insults at the protesters, all the while taping as much as they could.

Even in the best of circumstances, taking part in a Brotherhood-affiliated protest came with the risk of significant jail time. But many figured that if their names weren’t already on some police dossier, they’d be soon enough. They had less to lose. As difficult as this period was, it served as a political coming of age. These activists came to believe that the future of the movement depended on them, in part because it did. If they were detained, then at least they knew their families (and legal expenses) would be looked after by the Brotherhood—one of the many “perks” of membership.

These accidental leaders had adopted revolution as their call. Not surprisingly, they now looked back at the Morsi era through the distorting prism of revolutionary purity, judging the Brotherhood’s actions against that lofty standard. The thirty-five-year-old journalist Asmaa Shokr, a local Brotherhood official and media spokesperson in the posh Cairo suburb of Mohandiseen, was one such activist. When I sat down with her in Istanbul in February 2015, she was getting used to her new life, settling into a routine of dropping her kids off at school, talking strategy with fellow exiles, and meeting with reporters and researchers like me.

Exile is an odd thing. Many Brotherhood leaders left for Doha in the summer and fall of 2013, often fleeing Egypt through excruciating treks to the Sudanese border. The easier journeys involved “thousands of dollars in bribes to airport security officials.”41 It was early then, when they still held to the belief that Sissi’s days were numbered. Sitting in a Doha hotel lobby, I remember asking the Brotherhood’s Hamza Zawba, “So you’re in exile now?” He laughed, and then said, “Let’s see if we can find another word for it!”42 But the second wave of political refugees like Asmaa Shokr had both the benefit and the burden of knowing they wouldn’t be returning anytime soon.

Unlike her more prominent counterparts in Istanbul, Asmaa had struggled for nearly a year in Egypt, organizing weekly protests, before managing to flee the country (“No one knew I was leaving, even my family,” she recalled). She had suffered more than any of them. “Do you know how many funerals we’ve attended?” she asked me.43 She had witnessed two massacres. Asmaa took it one day at a time, worrying about what might happen to her children if she was imprisoned. Having been on the front lines, she had earned the right to speak—and to criticize. Hers was a revolutionary legitimacy that no one could take away.

She loved the Brotherhood. “I grew up with the Brotherhood. It’s like you feel like you’re part of this big family,” Asmaa told me. But looking back at the Brotherhood’s rise and fall, she felt more anger than regret. The incompetence of the Morsi government baffled her. It was obvious, for instance, that the military was preparing to stage a coup. Why, then, did Morsi hold on to the hope that Sissi would protect him? “They kept telling us not to worry, that everything was just dandy,” she recalled.

A year and a half after the coup, it was time for an accounting. “These are the people who brought us to this disaster,” Asmaa said. “Any leader who held a position of responsibility—I can’t have confidence in him. With respect, it’s time for you to leave, if you were an official, if you were a minister under Morsi, whatever. They’re not going to change. That’s the way they think.” Their crime, as Asma saw it, was naïveté coupled with a lack of revolutionary fervor:

We should have purified state institutions. Let’s put to the side for a moment the decision to run for the presidency. You have the presidency; you control both the executive and legislative branches. So what do you do? You purify the state television channels. When a channel spreads a rumor about the Brotherhood, investigate it, and if it turns out to be fabricated, close the channel down.

She wasn’t about to be fooled again. Asmaa was now calling for revolutionary courts, trials for military leaders—including, of course, Sissi—and overhauling the state. On how to actually get there, Asmaa was lacking in details. Sure, it didn’t sound practical, but, as she understood it, revolution wasn’t necessarily something you planned; it was something that happened, when the time was right and any number of factors came together in a perfect storm of action and purpose.

Asmaa and others like her were critical of nearly every Brotherhood leader, but they reserved much of their scorn for a shadowy figure named Mahmoud Hussein, the Brotherhood’s secretary general and one of the only members of the organization’s Guidance Council who wasn’t in prison or on the run. Hussein shied away from the limelight and avoided reporters, yet, based first in Doha and then Istanbul, he was the Brotherhood’s strongman, wielding considerable power. Stubborn and immovable, Hussein was notorious for a seeming inability to admit fault. Meanwhile, his tendency to operate in the shadows clashed with the unabashed, transparent anger of the rank and file. Mahmoud Hussein’s allies in the anticoup National Alliance for Supporting Legitimacy would complain that they never quite knew what Hussein was thinking and whether he was up to something behind their backs.

Hussein’s influence was likely overstated, but, as an embodiment of all that had gone wrong, his specter served a purpose, offering a focal point for the burgeoning anger of the rank and file. The Brotherhood may have been hierarchical, but hierarchy was difficult when there wasn’t anyone inside Egypt to oversee it. The most leaders could do was try their best to contain or channel revolutionary sentiment, which could easily become a liability if it morphed into violence.

In the 1990s and 2000s, the Brotherhood initiated a series of reforms that expanded the scope of internal democracy within the organization, particularly on the local level.44 (Interestingly, the Brotherhood has a history of holding elections when repression is at its worst.) If and when internal elections were held in this new, postcoup era, ordinary members would have their say, and leaders on the outside would have to come to terms with those decisions. In other words, the gap between an angry, revolutionary base and a cautious leadership would have to close, one way or another. And it did in 2014, as local Brotherhood offices across Egypt began electing new leaders. With the Brotherhood’s General Guide Mohamed Badie in prison, a new “secret” guide was selected. He wasn’t necessarily revolutionary, but there was an expectation that he would at least respect the growing revolutionary sentiments of the membership. As Islamist activist Ammar el-Beltagy, who fled to Turkey in 2014, told me, “This is not about who the guide is. Whoever he is, he can’t oppose the revolutionary wave.”45

Neither could anyone else. Brotherhood leader Amr Darrag often found himself a convenient target because of his inability to sound anything but conciliatory and reasonable, perhaps too reasonable. He had been allowed to stay in Egypt as long as he kept a low profile, but soon enough the regime came for him, too. He managed to flee the country in a treacherous trek across the Sudanese border, ending up in Doha before moving to Istanbul. By early 2015, he had caught the revolutionary bug. It may have not been the best fit for the Purdue-educated Darrag, who had served as Morsi’s minister for international cooperation and spoke confident, flawless English. In a different world, he probably would have made for a successful, even popular technocrat in a transitional government somewhere where politics was more quiet and cordial. But now he was in exile in Turkey, trying to start a new life with his family. When I saw him in February 2015, just after the Brotherhood’s internal elections, he was jovial and optimistic as usual, with a hint of the sadness one sees in people who have been overtaken by events beyond their control.

“Egyptians have changed,” he told me, as we sat in a café on the outskirts of Istanbul. “I’m not the same person I used to be. I’m more revolutionary.… If I look at the list of mistakes the Brotherhood made, this is the biggest one: trying to fix the system from inside gradually.”46 But, for Darrag, there were clear limits and, like many others in the leadership, he was worried about the growing openness to violence that he sensed among many of the Brotherhood’s younger activists.


A Question of Violence

Having renounced violence in the early 1970s, the Brotherhood has been a forceful advocate of nonviolent change for decades. Yet this hasn’t kept its critics from suspecting that such a shift was merely tactical and that it was only a matter of time. Jihad, after all, features prominently in Hassan al-Banna’s teachings. His essay “On Jihad” is an ode to dying in the service of God and the umma. Even with Banna’s caveat—“Allah did not ordain Jihad for the Muslims so that it may be used as a tool of oppression or tyranny or so that it may be used by some to further their personal gains”—it is not hard to see how opposition would stir to Banna’s writings.47 “The umma that knows how to die a noble and honorable death is granted an exalted life in this world and eternal felicity in the next,” he writes, urging his followers to prepare themselves for martyrdom.48

In the 1940s, the Brotherhood established a “secret apparatus,” which was implicated in various acts of violence, including the assassination of Prime Minister Mahmoud Nuqrashi Pasha in 1948. Banna, by this time, found himself unable to control the militants in his organization. He dissociated himself from Nuqrashi’s murder and condemned the perpetrators, but the damage had been done. The Brotherhood also sent battalions of members to fight on the side of the Arabs in the 1948 war with Israel, but violence in the context of a war between nations was different than attacking your own government.

Many in the Brotherhood—including chief ideologue Sayyid Qutb—radicalized over the course of the 1950s and ’60s, were irrevocably changed by their harrowing experiences in the dungeons of Gamal Abdel Nasser. “As the guards marched arrivals down the gloomy passageways in chains, they could hear the cries and desperate shouts of fellow Muslim Brothers,” writes John Calvert, author of arguably the best English-language biography of Qutb, who was imprisoned in 1954.49 How could fellow Egyptians—fellow Muslims—be capable of such brutality toward their brothers in Islam, Qutb and his cohorts wondered. Soon enough, they managed to find a way to make sense of their ordeal, in an intellectual shift that would reverberate for decades to come: Perhaps those guards—and rulers like Nasser—weren’t true Muslims. The 1957 prison massacre of twenty-one Brotherhood members was a defining moment. Qutb, writes Calvert, “was in the infirmary when the guards brought in the injured. The floor would have been covered with his comrades’ blood. The massacre elicited terrible emotions in Qutb.”50 Again, we find ourselves face-to-face with the problem of theodicy, and how trying to make sense of evil can pave the way for yet more evil. Qutb’s successors took his arguments several steps further with their condemnation of most Muslims as “disbelievers,” thereby making their blood licit. The Brotherhood, though, was moving in a different direction by the late 1960s, and the group’s general guide at the time, Hassan al-Hudaybi, issued a disavowal of Qutb’s most controversial ideas in the book Preachers, Not Judges.51

As the question of violence dogged the Brotherhood, it went out of its way to highlight its gradualist, nonviolent approach to political change. In the 1990s, extremist groups waged a low-level insurgency against the Egyptian regime. The Brotherhood came under growing pressure to distinguish itself from the perpetrators of the increasingly brutal attacks, including the killing of foreign tourists. With the world paying greater attention, the Brotherhood’s leaders made the case to domestic and international audiences that they were a different breed of Islamist that pursued nonviolence, spoke the language of human rights and democracy, and sought gradual rather than revolutionary change.

To be a Brotherhood member meant to be immersed in an ethic of nonviolence, which went hand in hand with the organization’s insistence on gradualism, the long game of politics, and the centrality of electoral competition. This ethic was on display in Rabaa. Facing a likely massacre, one might have expected protesters to smuggle arms and return fire when the military moved in and launched its attack. But, with only a handful of exceptions, this did not happen. At the end of the day, security forces had confiscated fifteen guns from the sit-in, hardly a match for twelve hours of the military’s indiscriminate gunfire, teargas, and bulldozers.52 Eyewitnesses reported isolated gunfire on the part of protesters; those who responded to the attacks threw rocks or Molotov cocktails, while a few carried sticks or clubs.53 Looking back at those early months after the coup, what’s remarkable isn’t how many Brotherhood supporters turned to violence, but how few.

After the coup, in a speech that became a rallying cry, the Brotherhood’s general guide, Mohamed Badie, who was presumed until that point to be under arrest, emerged to tell followers gathered in Rabaa that “our peacefulness is stronger than their bullets.” He promised to resist nonviolently until Morsi’s reinstatement. The struggle “is peaceful, and will remain peaceful,” Badie said.54

In practice, however, peacefulness didn’t seem to be working particularly well. The presumption—naive in retrospect but sensible at the time—was that the military wouldn’t be able to sustain high levels of violence and brutality. Unlike, say, Syria or Iraq, the army didn’t represent a particular sect or ethnicity. The army was made up of Egyptians from every family (young men with at least one other male sibling are required to serve). Would conscripts really be willing to turn their fire on fellow Egyptians, and for how long? Egypt didn’t have a history of this kind of internecine conflict. There was also the role of the international community to factor in. Would Egypt’s patrons, including the United States, be willing to turn a blind eye to wanton abuses, with the whole world watching?

Outside contexts of civil war, nonviolent resistance is generally considered to be more effective than violent alternatives, precisely because of the role of international actors.55 As Maria Stephan and Erica Chenoweth note in an important 2008 study, “Externally, the international community is more likely to denounce and sanction states for repressing nonviolent campaigns than it is violent campaigns.”56 The regime’s use of excessive force against nonviolent groups can be critical to the latter’s success, resulting in “sympathy and a possible increase in legitimacy” as well as political and financial support from the international community.57 Yet what might apply in normal circumstances was unlikely to apply in Egypt. When Islamists are the ones being repressed, the calculus changes considerably. Over the past twenty-five years, there have not been any instances of anti-Islamist repression in the Arab world that have elicited significant international outrage.58

As Brotherhood leaders saw it, though, while peaceful protests may not have quite brought down the regime, any turn to violence was almost certain to fail. Asmaa Shokr recalled one telling example of the leadership’s fear of starting down the path of violence, even as a reaction to overwhelming regime violence. “On the day of the Rabaa dispersal,” she told me, “someone tried to torch a car, and a Brotherhood leader was close by and told him to stop. I was shocked that day. Your children are dying in front of you and you care about a car?”59 There was a bitterness, and that bitterness would only grow.


Portrait of a Young Man in Prison

What does it look like to come of age in the Brotherhood, to find yourself skipping classes and revolting against the state? In an organization that prioritized the principle of “listening and obeying,” how did Brotherhood youth decide enough was enough and start questioning not just the decisions of their leaders, but some of Brotherhood’s most basic assumptions about violence and political change? The story of one of these activists—I’ll call him Karim—reflects a journey that has become all the more common. These are young men and women who grew up in the Brotherhood’s embrace, dedicating their lives to the movement. But a series of unlikely events—the revolution, Morsi’s rise to the presidency, then a coup, followed by a massacre—led them, however slowly, from certainty to doubt. Their commitment to the Brotherhood is so deep—the Brotherhood after all is not so much an organization as a way of life—that they would never think seriously of leaving. But they questioned nearly everything else: tactics, strategy, and even what it meant to believe in and fight for an Islamic state.

For the twenty-three-year-old Karim, a dentistry student, the shock started the day of the coup. “It was June twenty-eighth,” he recalled. “I was in Rabaa, and a Brotherhood official was talking to us, telling us not to worry, that ‘the army is in our pocket.’ Great. I believed them because I didn’t have the information to come up with a different opinion. That’s why when the coup happened, it was such a big shock.”60

Karim generally agreed with the Rabaa sit-in, but the surrounding circumstances worried him. “I started to have questions,” he recalled. “Okay, what if they came in and hit us? Then we’ll defend ourselves, but we don’t have anything to defend ourselves with. If so, then we’re just offering ourselves for death.” Despite his doubts, there wasn’t a protest he would miss in those few first months after Rabaa. But what he described as the Brotherhood leadership’s “radical peacefulness” continued to grate on him. “Your job is to get killed and that’s it,” he told me. “I don’t want violence, but at the same time I don’t want that kind of peacefulness. So if we let them kill us and we lose two hundred thousand people, okay, and then what? He has no compunction to kill. Nothing will stop him, except if the people he’s killing can resist.”

In early 2014, he was arrested. It was an ordinary day (to the extent that life on the run can be ordinary). Karim joined a protest, as he always did after the weekly Friday prayer. He was, by now, fairly skilled at this sort of thing, having attended protests at least weekly, sometimes daily, though his enthusiasm was starting to wane. This time, when the police came, his friends were able to get away, but he found himself surrounded on both sides by officers. He laughed and then told me, “I was the only one who got arrested!”

Even in the best of times, Egyptian prisons are notorious for their subhuman conditions. These were not the best of times. There were thirty people in a small cell, probably not much larger than four by six meters. The prisoners couldn’t sleep on their backs, only on their side. “You can’t even spread your legs out or else you’ll end up hitting someone,” Karim recalled, his voice steady and reflective, as if remembering a field trip gone awry. There were ten Muslim Brotherhood members. The rest were also political prisoners of various sorts, most of whom had been rounded up at street protests. The Brotherhood assumed leadership of the cell, offering religious classes to the other prisoners on the Quran and the life of the Prophet Mohamed. It was ideal for recruitment. You had thirty people in close quarters, together twenty-four hours a day. There was nothing to do but talk to everyone else about everything—religion, politics, tactics, and strategy.

Three months and three weeks into his four-month prison stint, he was moved to another prison unit. This is where Karim’s evolution would continue, his doubts heavier than before. In a neighboring cell, there was a charismatic Salafi preacher named Ahmed Ashoush. After returning from the anti-Soviet jihad in Afghanistan, Sheikh Ashoush spent nineteen years in prison, from 1992 until the start of the Arab Spring. He was an unrepentant Salafi jihadi. Before the coup, Ashoush had gained modest recognition in the Egyptian press as a “controversial” and open critic of Morsi and the Brotherhood. In a 2012 talk show appearance, he described Morsi as an “illegitimate” president. Morsi, he added, was no different from the other Egyptian presidents that came before him—even if he happened to be a more observant Muslim. Ashoush instead called for a true Muslim ruler to run a true Islamic state.61

The prison guards would open the cells for about ten minutes, and Karim would sneak off to Ashoush’s cell and stay there the rest of the day. He only had four days with the sheikh, but he made the most of it, spending every waking hour with him. Before his arrest, Ashoush had memorized dozens of books. He spent much of his nineteen years in prison going over the details in his head, making sure he didn’t forget a thing. This was also how he stayed sane. “[Ashoush] was just so knowledgeable that he was able to influence me to an extraordinary degree,” Karim told me. Ashoush challenged him on the ideological origins of the Brotherhood, linking Banna to Jamal al-Din al-Afghani and Mohamed Abduh. He viewed the two leading Islamic modernists as dangerous innovators who had fallen under the allure and influence of Western colonialism. Not only that, they were murtadeen, or apostates. Ashoush challenged his eager student on the Muslim Brotherhood’s 2012 constitution. “Morsi’s constitution is far from the ideas of establishing sharia and Islam,” Karim recalled the sheikh saying. “I wasn’t able to say much in response because he was telling me things I didn’t know in the first place.”

In just a few days with Sheikh Ashoush, the doubts began to gather. One of Karim’s friends, who joined our conversation at the coffee shop, jumped in. “With Brotherhood youth,” he said, “there is a deficit of religious education. We weren’t raised well intellectually. So when we sit with people like Sheikh Ashoush and hear big talk, about this book and that book, naturally we’re overwhelmed.” Contrary to popular perception, Salafis are at least in some ways more theologically sophisticated than their counterparts in the Brotherhood. For reasons inherent to their particular brand of Islamism, theology isn’t as important for Brotherhood-inspired groups. This is why Salafis like Ashoush tend to look at the Brotherhood with suspicion: Because of their modernist pedigree, they’re too flexible, too pragmatic, and too willing to use sweeping maslaha (public interest) arguments to justify or rationalize what are ultimately political imperatives.

Karim had also been wondering whether the Brotherhood’s long-standing methods could be effective against a regime that was oblivious to the moral and human costs of violence. Arab prisons—and the fact that Egyptian authorities were quickly building new ones to meet demand—embodied the failure of politics and the triumph of force. For would-be prisoners, it didn’t matter whether they were peaceful or violent; they’d be arrested all the same, and the peaceful ones would often find themselves slapped with longer sentences.

Prisons were ideal incubators for radicalism, providing a space for hardened Salafis to preach the gospel of purity and jihad. The bitterness that builds during a long prison term isn’t something that goes away easily. Karim was lucky that his sentence was short. After his release, he continued to grapple with the questions that had been nagging him. He decided to stay in the Brotherhood but promised himself he would learn as much as he could about the group’s history and keep an open mind about ideas coming from outside the movement. To the extent that he could, he—along with thousands of young activists who shared at least some of his doubts—would try to change the organization from within.

Like many of his comrades, Karim had given considerable thought to the question of violence. Nearly nine months after his release from prison, he still believed that taking up arms would be a mistake. He instead proposed a path somewhere in between armed insurrection and the “radical peacefulness” he had so derided. First, as he saw it, defending yourself against the violence of others was a moral and legal right. This was “defensive” violence—to be distinguished from “intentional” or “offensive” violence. But morality aside, violence had to serve a purpose. Karim realized that violent acts, embraced only out of necessity and even then reluctantly, weren’t going to bring down the regime. Rather, the objective was to establish “red lines” and to “reach” members of the regime who were oblivious to the consequences of their actions. The example raised by Karim, echoed by many others I spoke to, was perhaps the most obvious one, as it captured the indignity, outrage, and horror of Brotherhood members: that of a police officer who raped a sister (“sister” here being either literal or figurative or both). “If there’s a person known to take girls and sexually assault them, find out where he lives and then torch his car,” Karim told me. “Leave a message not to do it ever again; otherwise, the punishments will be more serious.”

Beyond the burning of police cars and the targeting of security personnel, Brotherhood youth were asking themselves what next. Beyond supposedly serving as deterrents against future police brutality, what was this sort of low-level, anarchic violence meant to accomplish? To answer such a question, more systematic thinking was required, and so Karim walked me through his thought process. “What are the elements that strengthen or weaken the coup?” he asked me rhetorically. “That’s what we have to think about.” “The violence I support,” he went on, “is the violence which targets the coup’s sources of strength without spilling the blood of innocents. I don’t want anyone to die. So, for example, we can target companies with close ties to the regime and military as well as multinationals. These are the ones who can force Sissi to change his policies. If their economic interests are threatened, they may be willing to pressure Sissi to rethink his approach.”


An Unlikely Ideologue

It was no accident that Karim’s ideas sounded similar to some of the missives of an unlikely, eccentric ideologue named Shahid King Bolsen, who had become semipopular in revolutionary Islamist circles around the same time. The story of Bolsen, a forty-three-year-old convert to Islam and native of Boulder, Colorado, sounds like something out of a film noir. He was convicted of murder in the United Arab Emirates in a bizarre incident where he posed as a woman and lured a German man to his apartment ostensibly to help him see the error of his ways. What actually happened isn’t entirely clear. “We fought,” says Bolsen, “and I unfortunately caused his death.”62 After a lengthy appeals process, his conviction was reduced to manslaughter. Bolsen was released from prison—where he had spent seven years—after paying blood money to the victim’s family. He soon moved to Istanbul, where he began attracting a cult following for his unusual mix of Islamism and leftist rants against neoliberalism. Since adolescence, Bolsen had been moved by economic and social injustice—he had even adopted “King” as his middle name after Martin Luther King, Jr. His financial difficulties—he struggled to find work after an Internet café venture in Dubai failed—and an idiosyncratic reading of anticapitalism add to the evident bitterness in his writings. “The pyramid economy has become an obelisk, in which a tiny number of billionaires own approximately twice the total value of currency in circulation on the Earth,” he wrote on his blog in late 2014.63

Bolsen, a college dropout, had no religious training and spoke little Arabic. He had no real media platform, at least not until his supporters began distributing his translated writings through various Islamist networks. Mostly, he shared his thoughts on the evils of the neoliberal world order on his Facebook page, which slowly accrued more followers. His message was simple enough, that Egypt’s revolutionaries “can prove that collaboration with the coup is bad for business.”64 Addressing the revolutionaries, he tells them to “inflict loss, decrease profit, increase expense, lower investor confidence, deflate share values.”65 In another post, he explains the logic as follows:

When you strike KFC, or any of their companies, your message goes directly to the top of the pyramid. If the investors who work through Vanguard alone are convinced that the Coup cannot secure their capital, they easily have the power to demote Sissi from the presidency of Egypt, to washing dishes at KFC.66

Bolsen also offers detailed instructions, for example suggesting the use of homemade caltrops to disrupt transportation and close down roads. Bomb scares are another do-it-yourself method. “Hundreds of work hours, profit loss, disrupted operations, and increased expense … because of a phone call,” he writes.67 Bolsen hailed the early closure of the telecommunications company Etisalat in early 2015—caused by threats on the company, most likely a bomb scare—as an ideal act of civil disobedience: “There was no bloodshed, and no arrests, but the actions sent a wave through the entire system of corporate control.… May Allah bless those responsible, they have not only struck a blow against the stability of the Coup, but also against the corporate imperial system itself.”68 Inside Egypt, activists associated with an obscure group called the Popular Resistance Movement apparently took Bolsen seriously enough, staging an attack on a KFC in the town of Quesna and using slogans he first popularized.69 While there is no evidence—contrary to regime claims—of Brotherhood involvement, plenty of the group’s members either sympathize with or, like Karim, support such acts.

It all sounded incredibly naive to me, so I pushed back. Karim acknowledged that the “targeted” violence of the kind he was describing might provoke a very different response than the one intended. Targeting multinationals, of course, might only harden the business community’s position, pushing them even closer to the Sissi regime. Moreover, the military would use such attacks as a pretext to move even more aggressively against the Brotherhood and its interests, provoking a terrifying wave of violence and counterviolence. What if that happens? I asked him. He hoped that it wouldn’t. But if it did, at least it would clarify matters—“if the military becomes a combatant against the Egyptian people in such a blatant way,” Karim told me, “then we will turn it into Syria.” He knew this would be a disaster, but he sounded resigned. “If only ten thousand have died, then that’s nothing in the context of a revolution.”

The very fact that young Brotherhood activists might take someone like Bolsen seriously was itself a sign of the changing times. Even if Brotherhood leaders were learning to speak the language of revolution, they were still temperamentally cautious, preferring slow deliberation over sudden political shifts. But if Bolsen was anything, he was reckless. Speaking for no one but himself and ultimately unaccountable for the consequences of his ideas, Bolsen frequently contradicted some of the more fundamental elements of the Brotherhood’s political strategy. For example, in one January 2014 Facebook post, he argues that “it is a mistake in Egypt to focus on changing the government, and trying to return Morsi to power.” He goes on: “The form and features of the government do not actually matter that much, and that’s not what the problem is in Egypt. It is only a distraction to become obsessed with ‘restoring democracy’ and so on.”70 This is a rather obvious criticism of the Brotherhood’s priorities. But, more than that, Bolsen’s exclusive focus on neoliberal economic policies over political institutions goes against the entire premise of the group’s approach to politics. (While more than comfortable with the rhetoric of social justice and equality, the Brotherhood tends to avoid more sweeping critiques of neoliberal economic structures.)

Fundamentally, Bolsen had little interest in the Egyptian state as such and was more likely to see the Sissi regime as the inevitable by-product of economic imperialism. The Brotherhood, meanwhile, had come to see the modern nation-state—and the economic order that went along with it—as constants or, in the words of legal scholar Wael Hallaq, “timeless.”71 The state was indispensible because it was the state, through parliaments and presidencies, that could redirect and re-render society through the modification and changing of laws. As Shahab Ahmed writes, this was not an Islamist problem as much as it was a modern problem. The centralization and codification of law—and the control and monopolization of power and territory that comes along with it—has been essential to the process of state building. Why, Ahmed asks, should modern Muslims assume “the constitutive centrality of law to the constitution of Islam” and not focus just as much, if not more so, on rethinking “theology, philosophy, ethics, poetics, and Sufism”?72


Losing Faith

The openness to ideas that violated the Brotherhood’s basic understanding of political change reflected a deeper shift in the world of political Islam. Everywhere, and not just in Egypt, Islamists and the so-called “Islamic project” were evolving. Islamism has never existed in a vacuum; it draws on the peculiarities of time and place. The Arab Spring and its quick demise forced Brotherhood-inspired organizations to rethink their basic assumptions. For decades, they had streamlined their focus considerably, settling into a comfortable though inconclusive routine of contesting flawed elections, pushing autocratic regimes for greater freedoms, and hoping that when a political opening finally came, they’d be there to reap the rewards.

A succession of events called into question any “elections-first” approach to politics, particularly in states that now lacked not just elections but also functioning governments. Meanwhile, Egyptian and Tunisian Islamists’ brief experiences in government showed that, far from a blessing, the promise of power could prove a burden and even a curse. The rise of Islamists provoked an especially hostile response from regional power brokers like Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates, which saw the Brotherhood as an existential threat and a challenge to its own religious and political legitimacy. With Turkey and Qatar as the two leading supporters of Islamists across the region, an Arab cold war emerged, with each bloc wading into an ever-multiplying number of proxy battles.

The collapse of central governments, as in Yemen, Syria, and Libya, and their ceaseless politicization elsewhere, as in Egypt, challenged the basic building block of modern politics: the nation-state. If the nation-state was no longer a given, then neither was mainstream Islamism’s slow-moving, gradualist approach to politics.

As if that weren’t enough, the rise of the Islamic State—portraying itself as the standard bearer of not just Islamism but Islam—presented yet another challenge to the Brotherhood’s state-centric approach. It was little accident that just a month after Egypt’s coup, the Islamic State singled out the Brotherhood in an official statement, calling it a “bankrupt” model.73 The ballot box and the purple-stained finger were appropriate symbols for the first phase of the Arab Spring, capturing the euphoria of those who thought they finally had reason to hope. In its second phase, it might as well have been the black banners of the Islamic State, embodying the dark turn in the region’s fortunes. Across the region, Arabs were losing faith in politics. By “politics” here I mean something quite basic—the belief in the possibility that divides over what we hold most dear can be resolved through peaceful competition. The coup in Egypt was a gift to the Islamic State and its extremist ilk, further fueling an already potent message that fundamental change could only come through bullets and brute force.

In such an environment—with coups, extremists, cold wars, and proxy battles—it was little surprise that the likes of Shahid Bolsen would get a hearing from angry young activists looking for something, anything, to believe in. Much of Bolsen’s message may have sounded nonsensical, but it wasn’t necessarily any more unrealistic than believing in the return of democratic politics, winning a presidential election, and actually being allowed to govern.


A State Beyond the State

One of the main themes of this book is that the divides at the heart of the Arab state are difficult—perhaps uniquely difficult—to resolve. Mainstream Islamism has offered a particular response to the problem of the state, hoping to fuse Islamic law with modern state structures, but at the price of emphasizing the prerogatives of the state over the integrity of the law. Some would say it is a contradiction without a resolution. Islamic law wasn’t designed for the modern state. Over the centuries, the sharia developed into something organic and autonomous, a self-regulating and constantly evolving body of laws, norms, and traditions. In its considerable diversity, range, and scope, an anything but monolithic sharia wasn’t an intuitive fit for a powerful, all-encompassing state that sought to control and codify.*

The state as a fact of life couldn’t really be undone, at least not entirely. Even where states had failed, as in Iraq and Syria, the Islamic State found itself mimicking the nation-state despite its protestations to the contrary. It called itself the Islamic State, itself a rather audacious choice for a name. It had a flag and it collected taxes with a statelike bureaucracy. It sought to fulfill the basic social and economic functions of the modern state while rejecting the classic compromises of statecraft and international relations. Perhaps most important, it hoped to control the lives of its subjects in ways the premodern caliphate never could.

Some of it was awfully mundane, suggesting a kind of normalcy in the midst of a raging civil war. Here was the group’s would-be state fixing potholes, maintaining electric lines, opening food kitchens, and leading vaccination campaigns.74 In doing these things, the Islamic State sought to instill a sense of belonging and loyalty—a kind of nationalism—in its subjects. This “belonging,” however, was to be manufactured, constrained, and controlled. To the extent that there was something called “society” in the Islamic State’s version of the Islamic state, there was nothing particularly organic and autonomous about it. Society was meant to serve the state, something that premodern scholars would have found unfathomable. When the clerics of the Islamic State’s vaunted sharia courts—which were supposedly independent—produced problematic rulings, they were promptly dismissed. When an Islamic State cleric in the Syrian town of al-Bab ruled that the group’s February 2015 immolation of a Jordanian fighter pilot was un-Islamic, he was put on trial.75

As confrontational as they might be, Muslim Brotherhood youth express little sympathy for the Islamic State’s “model.” Instead, there is unanimous condemnation. They will often point out (correctly) that the Islamic State considers them, by virtue of being Brotherhood members, to be apostates. “Every time I look at ISIS, I wonder if Sissi is the least of our worries,” the London-based Brotherhood activist Abdullah El-Haddad told me. “Imagine ISIS coming to power in Egypt. What would they do to us?”76

More and more Brotherhood youth are expressing interest in a sort of Islamist third way, between the election-focused state centrism of the old Brotherhood and the self-conscious maximalism of ascendant extremists. They don’t quite know what it looks like—it’s never been done before—but they know what it doesn’t look like. At its most basic level, the vision that people like Karim and Asmaa Shokr have in mind is “revolutionary” and somewhat anarchic, accepting temporary destabilization and perhaps even bloodshed as the necessary price for long-term political change. What they share with a leadership whose stomach for confrontation has its limits is a new take on existing state structures. Amr Darrag, the former Morsi minister, sees this as one of the unintended benefits of an otherwise tragic turn of events. “It took a revolution and a coup to fix things in an organization that otherwise would have never changed,” he says.77

That the coup was a blessing is something that Brotherhood figures have said since the day it happened. Perhaps some of it was about trying to answer the question of why God permits evil. There had to be something behind the madness, the killing. Could it really be that more than eight hundred innocents not only died but died in vain? What may have initially sounded like wishful thinking and after-the-fact rationalization now had an air of plausibility. The coup and its tragic aftermath were forcing the Brotherhood to change. For the believer, accidents of history are never just that. And so it must have seemed like a greater plan was set in motion. Perhaps God was sending a message that the old ways of doing business had failed and that the Brotherhood’s assumptions needed to be reassessed, not necessarily because they were wrong then, but because they were wrong now.

* * *

AMR DARRAG WAS a moderate’s moderate, at least by Brotherhood standards. In an organization suffering from a dearth of intellectual and strategic thinking, Darrag at least had a good grasp of the political. In the weeks leading up to the Rabaa dispersal, he was the Brotherhood’s main interlocutor with the international community, meeting with senators, ambassadors, and diplomats as they scurried—and almost succeeded—in brokering a deal between the Brotherhood and the military that was based on a series of confidence-building measures.78 But that was all in the past, as Darrag settled into his new life as a political exile and the director of a new Istanbul-based think tank focused on Egyptian and regional affairs.

While studying at Purdue, Darrag must have gotten used to the snow in Lafayette, Indiana, but it had been a while. When I saw him in Turkey, it was an unusually cold winter. It had been snowing heavily, making my trek to the outskirts of Istanbul all the more challenging. This was, indeed, a different world, even as Darrag tried to make it his new home. He had lived every day since July 3, 2013, either fearing arrest or living in exile, which had given him considerable time—alone and away from Cairo’s stifling embrace—to ponder what came next.

He took it for granted that there would be a political opening, even if he didn’t quite know when. On this, he was correct. No autocracy lasts forever, and postcoup regimes in polarized societies tend to be fragile. It was a question, then, of what to do when the opening came. As Darrag saw it, any “elections-first” strategy would need to be scrapped entirely. New Brotherhood forays into electoral politics would polarize the country just as they had before. If they limited their ambitions and contested only a partial slate—say 25 percent of parliament seats—then that wasn’t exactly a great solution either, since a mix of old regime elements, Salafis, and a few corrupt liberals would likely win the rest. His model instead was what he called “partnership without elections,” where the focus would be on laying the foundations of a new Egyptian state. Elections would have to be postponed for a few years. The appropriate focus wasn’t who was in charge but what they would be in charge of.

“The overall structure of the state has to be rebuilt,” Darrag told me. The point of departure was Egypt’s sadly repeating history of political manipulation by and for the state. The centralization of power may have been an essential element of modern state building, but it was also a recipe for repression. The balance of power could be shifted away from the state by granting expanded authority to local governance structures. In effect, this would also reduce ideological polarization. On the local level, issues around the role of religion and the “foundations” of the state could be put to the side. Instead, the focus would be on the more immediate needs of communities, including improved social services, transportation, healthcare, and education. As Darrag saw it, this was a way of building trust between Islamists and non-Islamists by essentially agreeing not to fight over ideology, at least until greater trust and confidence could be built between the two sides. Instead of concerning itself with running for president and taking power, the Brotherhood would serve as the “guarantor” and guardian of the revolution. For the duration of the transition period, the Brotherhood would make decisions based on whether those decisions served one and one goal only: overhauling and even “purifying” the state. Of course, it was one thing to advocate such ideas while in the opposition; it was quite another to live up to them when tempted by power. And there would never be any way to know for sure until you had the choice.

Darrag’s ideas may have sounded original—and they were certainly more “revolutionary” than the Brotherhood’s precoup politics—but there remained the question of the ultimate purposes of the state, however decentralized and localized it was. Matters of religion could be postponed, but they couldn’t be postponed forever. Politics is also about what happens after you get what you want, whenever that might be.

* * *

I COULDN’T EXPECT BROTHERHOOD leaders to do what they hadn’t properly done for decades: outline a clear, coherent end state. They couldn’t be expected to offer a detailed framework for the establishment of a mythical Islamic state that might never come to be. This was not the time for treatises on Islamic political theory. The overriding concern was to ensure the organization’s survival and relevance at a time when it was threatened with extinction. Moreover, as we saw in the previous chapter, the Brotherhood benefitted from “constructive ambiguity” over the exact nature of its mission; it was a big-tent movement that couldn’t afford to alienate a large swath of its own supporters, especially when they were the ones keeping the organization alive.

But if young activists were willing to question the Brotherhood’s long-standing obsession with the state and if they were willing to question the very nature of political change, then perhaps they’d be willing to push the boundaries on what an Islamic state might look like, whether it was ten, twenty, or a hundred years into the future.

Here, too, I return to my conversation with Karim, who took the critique of the state several steps further. In so doing, he put into words what many Brotherhood youth hint at and gesture toward: a more avowedly and unapologetically “Islamic” end state. Of course, this isn’t particularly surprising—Islamists are Islamists for a reason, after all. They have a distinct ideological project that involves at least some “Islamization” of society. This Islamization, however, has been purposely downplayed or left vague by Islamist leaders who worry that too many details might frighten the international community and provoke a backlash among those who oppose Islamism more than they oppose autocracy.

But if their opponents, the reasoning goes, think the worst of them anyway—and have little objection to killing them in large numbers—then does it really make much of a difference if they’re more explicit about their Islamism? It wasn’t just that, though. If you’re insisting on the need for revolution, then don’t you have some responsibility to think about and explain what, exactly, the revolution is for? Here, Karim’s statement of purpose was clear enough: “I want a revolution to change the ideology of the country.” He continued, “We’re not being honest in our discourse. This was the problem under Morsi. We made our message about providing ‘food’ and ‘drink.’ If Sissi were able to do an excellent job of providing food and drink, then what reason would I have to revolt? I’m revolting for a goal higher than this.”

Ahmad, the friend of Karim’s who had joined us, shook his head slightly. They had known each other in Egypt but had become close in Istanbul. They often disagreed in the playful way that brothers might. Two hours into our conversation, the mood had lightened as we dove into more theoretical issues, of what the Islamic state might look like and how to get there. By now, we were on our third round of sugar-doused Turkish tea. Ahmad, who had frozen his membership in the Brotherhood because of disagreements over strategy, emphasized the need to form coalitions with non-Islamists, workers, liberals, secularists, whatever. The common ground—the one thing that everyone in the opposition could agree on—was freedom. And with freedom, the Islamic state would come, but it would come organically. There was no need to get ahead of themselves. “Freedom is the first step in the long road to establishing an Islamic state,” Ahmad explained. “If people are granted their political freedoms and economic freedoms, then they will inevitably choose Islam.” In other words, the Egyptian people—and Muslims more generally—were naturally inclined toward Islam. This was their nature, or fitra, a concept with a long provenance in Islamic thought. Muslims were born pure. In their state of purity, they desired to be as close to God as possible, to submit to his will and fulfill his commandments. To the extent that Muslims deviated from this path, it was due to the corrupting influences of the temporal world, including the temptations of wealth and power.

The “freedom or Islam” debate, as they called it, was one that the two friends had been having for months. They agreed to disagree. However, when it came to the shape of the mythical Islamic state that would presumably come into being far into the future, they agreed on its basic outlines, though with the proviso that the model would require quite a lot of trial and error, since it had never really been done before.

The overarching principle was a radical shift in the relationship between society and state. “Society” would dominate, while the state—and by extension the public sector—would be weak and decentralized. Education, for example, wouldn’t necessarily come from the state but would instead be community-driven. The idea was to unleash the fitra of each and every citizen by reducing as much as possible the distorting impact of the state on the individual. Religious scholars would be insulated from state pressures because the clerical establishment would be disassociated from executive authority. “Religion should be about religion, not the state,” Ahmad said.

The state, assuming some minimal level of democracy, was inseparable from political party competition. After all, someone needed to assume power and control of the state bureaucracy. But if the state were weak, with civil society, the religious establishment, and local communities holding the balance of power, then the struggle for power would be less intense and polarizing. “In today’s politics, the main goal is to be in power. The main goal of the opposition is to oppose, because they too want power,” Ahmad told me. “Hopefully, in our vision, the state will be less powerful, so there will be less reason to fight over it.”

At this point in the conversation, my skepticism was threatening to get the better of me. I pointed out that the Brotherhood’s model was very much oriented around elections and “normal” political competition between parties. The Brotherhood likes elections “too much! That’s our difference with the leadership,” Ahmad responded. “We can live without elections and we did so for most of our history. Two hundred years in the history of man is nothing.”

It all sounded utterly divorced from the fundamental realities of the international system. For one, the Westphalian order was one based on a rather narrow conception of the state. Even where states were weak, it was rarely, if ever, because they wanted to be weak. They aspired to be strong, because the logic of statehood was one of control—monopolizing territory and the use of force, to say nothing of the appropriation of economic and natural resources.

It was no surprise, then, that Karim and Ahmad weren’t fans of this “secular international system,” as they called it. “I want to break the international order,” Karim insisted. “No matter how hard it is, this is the goal I want. That’s what I’m living for, even if I die in the process of fighting for it.” I asked him if he really wanted to be fighting such a struggle for the rest of his life: He didn’t want to have a family and live a calmer life, taking a step back from the disappointments of political activism? “Our understanding [of Islam] is that my whole life consists of the conflict between truth and falsehood, on the personal level between me and the devil, and between me and the attractions of the earthly life,” Karim explained. “Why am I entering this conflict?” he asked me. “Not because of this life, but because of the next.”

As a statement of a purpose, it was hard to argue with. As an American liberal who had no particular political cause to die for, I would always struggle to fully grasp the kind of certainty that Karim and Ahmad so clearly felt. Perhaps theirs was partly the passion of youth. Perhaps, if they were ever able to return to Egypt and if the Brotherhood became a legal party once again, they would practice normal politics within the existing international order like everyone else. Or perhaps something had really changed. Perhaps the Egyptian coup, the collapse of the regional order, and state failures from Libya to Yemen to Iraq would produce a lasting paradigm shift, one whose consequences we could only begin to imagine.

The question, ultimately, was a difficult one to answer. Could a gradualist organization—whose aversion to revolution was baked into its DNA—become something fundamentally different from what it had been for the better part of eighty years? The Brotherhood would never go as far as Karim and Ahmad might want it to go, but at least they and a new generation of Islamists could move the dial, acting as a kind of revolutionary lobby within the movement. One of the lessons of the Arab Spring was that, in times of crisis and collapse, change can happen at breakneck speed. I remember my time in Tahrir Square before Mubarak fell and asking revolutionaries if they had a plan for seeing Mubarak’s ouster through. What if he refused to step down? But in a matter of days, the man who had dominated Egyptian politics for thirty years was no longer. Now, four years later, their fortunes had reversed once again, and they were in exile. “Politics is the art of the possible,” I told the two young activists. Without skipping a beat, Ahmad replied, “Revolution is the art of the impossible.”





