2



"Oh , is he in Peking? The Old Marshal seen him?"

"I haven't heard."

"He works through Old Fu."

"Is there talk that Old Fu has hitched a thread on the southwest?"

"Is that so. Hardly worth his while, what?"

"That's it. Canton will never amount to anything."

"Canton has gone Red."

"The Russians are getting out of hand."

"Hey, tonight we speak only of the wind and moon."

"All right, you there! You took in a pet without feasting us,now say how you should be punished."

"Ha ha! How did you get to hear? I didn't dare disturb you all for such a trifling matter."

"Punish! Punish!"

"Stand dinner! Make your honorable pet fill our cups."

Sharkfins were served.

"Chin chin! Chin chin!" And "Ai, ai——ai, ai——" little cries of warning with a hand covering the wine cup to stop it from being refilled.

There was an alternative ten-course western dinner for foreigners but W. F. Ronald brought a loaf of bread just in case. He was well-known enough to indulge in this one small eccentricity. He was no bigger than the Chinese but well-built,with an ordinary pleasant face, hair combed straight back, a high nose pointing straight out with two wry lines at the base. He reached for his glass of water.

"There is foreign wine." The Young Marshal signalled a servant. "Whiskey? Champagne?"

"No, thanks. I don't drink."

"Mr. Ron never drinks, not a drop, heh heh heh!" the Minister of Education explained laughing.

"America prohibits wine," said the Under Secretary of Navy who had studied in the naval academy in England.

"Is pork also taboo?" another said.

"Actually a little port won't hurt. Very mild," said the another.

"You're not a Prohibitionist are you?" The English author Gravesend-Kemp pretended alarm.

"No."

"Then you must belong to one of your fascinating sects."

"Not used to Chinese food," observed another.

"Or Chinese women, heh heh heh! Mr. Ron is really a good man, no hobbies of any kind," said the Minister.

"Anyone who doesn't like Chinese women doesn't like women," Gravesend-Kemp said with a little bow.

"Eight Big Alleys don't represent Chinese women," the Young Marshal said.

"Hear, hear!" said the Under Secretary.

"Unfortunately they're the only ones a foreigner can get to know," Gravesend-Kemp said.

"What is this about?" Ronald gathered that it had to do with himself.

"Your manhood is being defended," said Bancroft, born in Shantung of missionary parents. The three foreigners were placed side by side to keep each other company.

"A good thing I don't speak the language," Ronald said.

"Hear no evil, speak no evil," the Young Marshal said.

"Not at all? After all these years?" said Bancroft.

"Not a word. I don't want to. It's just confusing."

"It may contradict your own ideas about China,"Gravesend-Kemp said. The Englishman was a little high. His dark eyes were set close to the level black eyebrows. The lower part of his face was big, making him look fat. He was famous for his first book about the Boxers' Rebellion, which he had been here in time to see. Naturally he could not stand the American newspaper hack turned advisor to the Chinese like himself.

"It's just as well not to understand a lot of what you're being told," Ronald said, "when people are just being polite or trying to give a good impression."

"He's just a poor linguist masquerading as a cynic,"Bancroft said.

"It is said that people of strong character have difficulty learning another language," the Young Marshal said.

"What about you? Would you call yourself a weak character?" said Gravesend-Kemp.

"Leave me out of this."

"Certainly a strong character, our Young Marshal," said the Under Secretary, "pioneer in everything, poker instead of dominoes, movie actresses and society girls instead of singsong girls."

"Insulting our women again. That reminds me, when are we going to play poker?" he called across the table in Chinese.

The Minister shook his head and waved a hand. "In poker I dare not keep you company. The Ministry of Education is a poor organization."

"You're too modest."

"Hey, Young Marshal, a Shanghai newspaper elected the Four Princes of the Republic. You're one."

He sniffed. "Princes of the Republic. That's a good swear word."

"Who are the others?"

"There's Yuan Hun-chuang——"

All comments passed over the other two, mere war lords'sons, less flattering comparisons.

"Hun-chuang is a poet and calligrapher but no match for the Young Marshal in military matters and all round brilliance."

"He's selling calligraphy in Shanghai. A real bohemian."

"Half Korean, isn't he? His mother was one of the two imperial concubines from Korea."

"Were you here during the restoration?" Bancroft asked Ronald.

"Which one?"

"The first president turning emperor."

"As a matter of fact I started the whole business. It was at just such a dinner as this. I was saying it's still debatable whether China is best suited to a monarchy or republic. And that set all the Chinese talking at once. Never saw them so excited. Within weeks the so called ‘Security Planning Society' sprang up all over the country boosting restoration."

He had fought the movement he touched off. He helped a dissident general under house arrest, smuggling him out of Peking in a laundry basket. The general stirred up other provinces against the new emperor. Ronald arranged for him to abdicate and continue as president. But the rebels insisted on retirement. Ronald had to quiet his fears for the safety of his family and ancestral graves before he would resign. Like a lonely champion Ronald had played both sides of the game.

"I say, are you from Texas?" Gravesend-Kemp said.

He smiled. "No, Oklahoma."

The Chinese listening to the translation nodded so steadily and heartily their heads made circles in the air. Contemporary history was unwritten and unsorted, a dangerous subject never to be committed to writing in their time. Truth has a thousand faces.

"Some has it that a singsong girl smuggled him out of Peking."

The Under Secretary added diplomatically to Ronald,"People knew somebody must have. It makes a better story if it was the girl he was going with."

"So I became a singsong girl."

"Tch, tch, how could you?" Gravesend-Kemp said.

"What's Hsu Chow-ting doing abroad?" Ronald asked the Minister.

"Borrowing money."

"For the usual purpose? Build up the army."

"Heh heh heh heh!" the Minister sounded slightly embarrassed. Hsu was the Premier's man. The Premier had no army and ought not to need any with two protectors, the Old Marshal and the Christian General.

Ronald returned to his cold steak. He had this trick of suddenly shooting out a question after one of his long stories.When a listener was lulled into a sense of security the natural desire to compete for attention was apt to surface and the answer was more likely to be truthful.

The Chinese seemed to be still talking about the restoration. There was that story about mine host and the restoration, of course Ronald would not tell it here. The Old Marshal was already the ranking officer in Manchuria at the time. Peking saw to it that he got a governor he got along with.This was one of the fourteen governors who had sent in secret petitions for restoration. As a result he was created duke, first class. The Old Marshal was viscount, second class. The Old Marshal was not pleased. He got up a large group of officers to go with him to the governor's house saying, "Your Excellency being kingmaker will want to attend the coronation. We're here to beg for instructions as to the date of starting, so we can prepare the send-off."

The governor could see that he had to go. "I leave for the capital tomorrow evening."

The Old Marshal played it out to the end, gathered all the staff for the farewell feast. Manchuria never had another governor. The new emperor had his hands full.

"He wanted to be emperor as far back as the Korean expedition," the Under Secretary translated. "He was taking a nap in his tent. An orderly came in and saw a huge frog in the bed, was so scared he broke a vase. He did not scold, just told the man not to talk. Dangerous if the Manchus knew one of their generals was going to be emperor one day."

"Is frog a royal emblem?" Gravesend-Kemp asked.

"No, any big animal. Turning into one when you are asleep is said to be a sign. What really happened must be the orderly was afraid to be punished for breaking a vase and so invented the excuse."

"A big frog," the murmur ran around the room. No one dared praise the orderly for a quick imagination. The first president had rather looked like one.

Just the sort of colorful superstition that would interest foreigners, Ronald thought. He had no patience for these things that supposedly make the Chinese different, because he knew they are not.

"I had this from Liu Tze-chien who was in his secretariat.He actually considered marrying a Korean princess to become king of Korea."

"He's from Honan, that's why. The seat of the earliest dynasties. The mind is influenced by the royal traditions. He'd never have dared if he was born south of the Yangtze," said a man from south of the Yangtze.

"He's a nineteenth century Chinese," Ronald said. "Very capable, but he aged early. Quite worn out in his fifties, hair and moustache all white. He got the idea that I'm for the Nationalists. Greeted me every time with ‘Lao ming-dang, old Nationalist, what's new in Canton?' "

"Mr. Ron has a bellyful of anecdotes," the Minister said and repeated it in English.

"What else is there?" Ronald said. "The last twenty years was just a jumble of personalities, the kind that figure in anecdotes."

"How old are you anyway?" the Young Marshal said.

"Oh, I saw you the other day," Ronald said.

"Where?"

"Playing golf on the Great Wall."

He laughed. "Very good golf links."

Quite a memorable figure in his wide white flannel trousers on the green grass of the inner slope. He was said to be fond of all things modern, had been close to the Y. M. C. A. people in Mukden while learning English. Talked better than he listened, got away the minute he sensed advices and lectures.The father was a sloe-eyed frail little man with a forced smile under the moustache. Ronald knew his type. In Oklahoma they had local big shots who had started life as cowboys like the Old Marshal. No, he was a horse doctor, to be exact. Manchuria seemed to have been very much like the Old West. Horses ploughed the land and were ridden across great distances. To avenge his father who was killed by a gambler he got into the enemy's house at night and shot a maid servant by mistake.He ran away to join the army. Years later he came back, was promptly arrested but escaped from prison. He hired himself out as protector to a village. It was difficult to tell between protectors and bandits, hence the legend that he had been a hu fei, bearded bandit, also called red beard, possibly originating from marauding white tribes on the Amur but more likely a reference to the standard make-up for robbers in Peking Opera.With a dozen men under him he settled down and sent for his wife. His son the present Young Marshal was born in a village.On being challenged by a large gang he proposed a duel with the leader who had no sooner said yes when the Old Marshal whipped out a pistol and shot him dead. So by a quick draw he won his first important battle and absorbed a hundred new men into his following.

The cowboy had grown old, smoked opium and kept many concubines. He had his own way of doing things. Ronald could always get a job here. The Minister of Education was an old acquaintance, a carry-over from former governments, and had made him offers. The fact was practically any foreigner who accosted a Chinese official would be given the title of advisor and 200 Yuan a month just to keep him quiet. It had been so since Manchu times. Of course advisors like GravesendKemp were not after the 200 Yuan. The Old Marshal must have paid him a tidy sum for his latest book, "The Lonely AntiCommunist: His Struggles in Far Asia". Unlike his other works this one was published by a British bookstore in Shanghai. The Anti-Communist was the Old Marshal, the only bulwark against Communism in China. The western powers were urged to give him a free hand to take back from the Russians the ChineseEastern Railway in Manchuria. Japanese interest in Manchuria was scarcely mentioned. Did the Japanese commission the book? It was not like the Old Marshal anyway to place such trust in the powers of writing. Ronald made a mental note to find out.

He noticed the Young Marshal get up and leave the room,and suddenly felt empty. Had he talked to impress the Young Marshal? Partly it was because the dinner tonight so reminded him of the other on the eve of the restoration, the same big round table and buzz of talk, Tiffany lamps and an overall white glare, the room a rosewood cage, curlicue partitions with moon gates cut out of them, hung with apricot silk. That was already a dozen years ago when he was the youngest old China-hand.Sometimes he wondered why he stayed. What is he doing here, reporting on the murky political scene, telling stories at dinnertables, writing long letters on Chinese politics to his sisters in Coon Creek, Oklahoma. There is always a living for him here. The Chinese don't forget people easily. Has-beens are respectable here. There is something sinister about present power and wealth, especially now. The past even as recent as a decade ago has mellowed enough for nostalgia, as with the first president. Aside from being the granddaddy of war lords,the maker of things as is, he inherited the mantle of authority from the Manchus as their last chief official. Nevermind that he helped bring them down. That's the trend of the times and it is generally agreed that the Manchus are impossible. After he died his favorite pupils took turns succeeding him as president or premier. They constitute the only legitimate descent. Premier Tuan, the last of the star cadets of the military school he had founded, lost out to the new war lords risen from the ranks or worse. However all these upstarts have tried to maintain continuity by supporting one of the first president's men.The Old Marshal has got Tuan out of retirement to head his government, a sorry come-down for Tuan, everybody thinks.

"Hey, lao ming-dang!" what the first president had called him, being shouted across the table. The rest he did not understand.

"He said Old Nationalist, how is your fellow spy?"

"Who?"

"The Aunt of the Country."

"And who is that?"

"In Canton aren't they calling Sun Yatsun the Father of the Country? That makes his wife the Mother of the Country, and her sister will be the Aunt of the Country."

"Which sister?"

"The little one who is here as beauty bait. It looks like our Young Marshal has a mind to be the country's uncle by marriage."

"Not so loud," somebody cautioned.

"Gone. Off to the dance at Peking Hotel."

"So a north-south alliance is in the offing," another said.

"She will bring in more dowry than two battleships."

The Under Secretary of Navy had got the post by defecting from Canton with two ships.

"What does the Old Marshal think?"

"Our Old Marshal is great on loyalty. With his feeling for his in-laws, divorce is out of the question."

"Better tell that to the lady."

The Under Secretary was told to translate to Ronald.

"I've scarcely seen her since she was a little girl."

"As old friend of the family it's your duty to tell them she may lose her virtue here and lose face for the late Dr. Sun."

The Young Marshal was in the courtyard talking to Fourth Miss.

"Who's looking for me?"

"Don't know."

"Don't run. Who made you come anyway?"

"Nobody made me. I come and go as I please.""So where're you going now in such a hurry?"

"To the show."

"Which show? I'll go with you."

"People are waiting for you."

"Who?"

"Ask yourself."

"Little devil, so you won't tell, then I won't go."

"Then don't go, who cares?"

"You don't want me to."

"That's the thanks I get. Next time see who will take a message for you."

"What message?"

She struck him and they wrestled under the banana palm.

"Come-back-come-back, where're you off to?"

"To tell Big Sister-in-law."

Everybody knew he was not afraid of his wife. That wouldn't scare him. But she did not see him together with the Third Miss Chu later that evening and thought he did not come. Theirs was the rendezvous, in the courtyard just outside the roomful of liverish faces around the scarlet tablecloth,some standing up bellowing unsmiling, urging wine or declining it or challenging another to finger game, in the kind of male ceremoniousness that had always struck her as grotesque and completely incomprehensible, a circle of red cows being led through some temple ritual older than Confucius. The foreigners smiled fixedly, faded sepia heads resting on tall white collars like photographs. How like him to be with the foreigners instead of people like her father.

She could not get over how she had answered back. At home she was very quiet. "Don't start anything" was Aunt Hung's constant admonition. Her mother was dead, she was brought up by another concubine. All the other children had backing while Aunt Hung had long been out of favor. He had also lost his mother early and had been reared by the Fifth Old Concubine.

"Those young masters of theirs, no law, no heaven, the minute their father's back is turned," Aunt Hung had said.

"Not like us here," the amah agreed.

"They don't go in for these things," Aunt Hung half winked.

They chatted about the old days, putting each other right.Fourth Miss discovered that her father had given the Old Marshal his start. As viceroy of Manchuria he had granted amnesty to the bandit leader and made him a captain. Came revolution, the viceroy's inclination was to save Manchuria for the Manchus. But there were revolutionist plants in the army.At a military conference an officer suggested that they follow the example of other provinces and declare themselves "sympathetic to the revolution" but retain the viceroy as military governor.The Old Marshal stood up and spoke out of turn:

"I Chan Tzu-wong don't sympathize with the revolution,"and slapped his gun on the table.

After the conference which got nowhere the viceroy summoned Chan saying:

"The revolutionaries must be all set to act or they wouldn't have revealed themselves. I am ready to die for the emperor."

"Your Excellency need not worry. I Chan Tzu-wong happen to have a thing for loyalty. I'll be responsible for Your Excellency's safety."

He moved his own men in to guard Chou and ordered troops about in his name. The revolutionaries fled Manchuria.But Chou's plan to turn it over to Prince Su was foiled by the Japanese, possibly by the Old Marshal too. Chou finally gave up and took a job in Peking. As the governments rose and fell he retired. Now known as "king of the northeast" the Old Marshal pushed inside the Pass. The monster he had made had followed him to Peking although it was a grateful monster.

Fourth Miss was so surprised when she heard a half brother say, "We give Prince Su thirty thousand a year." Theirs was like a family of well-off pensioners, with enough to keep up the old rules but discountenanced by any new expenses. There was the great fuss when Aunt Hung put in a telephone in her courtyard so she could arrange to go out and play mahjong without using the family phone. She was paying for it herself,she had money of her own stowed away. The objection was that such extravagance might give rise to gossip. As if Aunt Hung could have a lover. Fourth Miss could not see her as a singsong girl. All that was known about her was that her last name was Hung before she entered the singsong house. Fourth Miss did not remember ever seeing her father in their courtyard. Aunt Hung had grown old quickly to save face, put on gold-rimmed spectacles and a black gown bulging in the middle from the fold of padded trousers.

"There's talk that Second Miss is engaged," an amah whispered and Aunt Hung whispered back:

"Which family?"

"The Tuans."

"Which branch?"

"Don't know. A widower they say. With lung trouble."

"These things are all in the stars. A healthy husband can also sicken."

"That's true."

"Any children?"

Fourth Miss heard them with consternation but never thought of it in terms of herself. Her half sister had always been a grown-up. The lottery of blind marriage gave everybody hope no matter what the odds were, especially when it was far in the future.

She learned this in the schoolroom:

"Slenderly swaying, just over thirteen,

A nutmeg on the bough in early March.

On three breezy miles of Yangchow road,

At all the windows with pearl blinds up

There's none as fair."

"Written for a courtesan," the tutor said.

It was inconceivable how the most beautiful courtesan of old Yangchow had been the same age as herself. Thirteen was actually twelve by modern reckoning which did not count you as a year old at birth. She felt the gulf of a thousand years looking across at the other thirteen-year-old.





