7



Her father called her into his study and spoke in his deepest voice with an official ring.

"The political situation is tense. The Old Marshal is sending the family back to Mukden. Leaving tonight. He has sent for you. Perhaps it's best in times like these——saves worries on both sides. Out of his friendship for me he is sure to treat you like a daughter. On your part however you have to learn to behave from now on. It's up to you yourself now. Tell your Aunt Hung to pack for you but there's no need to bring many things or people. Whatever you want can always be sent for later. Just dress warmly, it's cold outside the Pass. When the times are more settled you can come back and your Aunt Hung can also go and see you."

She had a wonderful trip. The Chans on their special train received her as a niece coming for a long visit. The Young Marshal's wife took her on as her special charge. She was to call her Big Sister from now on instead of Big Sister-in-law. Outside the Pass was China's Arctic. Sad princesses and palace beauties had been sent out there to marry the kings of the Huns. She was agreeably surprised by the heaving brown mountains and the grey sash of the Great Wall draped across them, buckled with twin square citadels. The scene never changed in the window, a picture screen being busily folded away, clackety-clack, clacketyclack, and still no end to it.

At the first stop next morning she looked out at a box car of soldiers halted on the next line. The soldiers were standing as if half out of the car. A peasant boy red-cheeked from the cold was eating his breakfast of fritter and bun. His thin face and neck came out of the padded uniform like the end of the fritter stick stuffed into the big sesame bun. They were talking and laughing a few feet away, yet soundless. She stared with a pleasant shiver around the heart, what she later thought was presentiment. The day after she got to Mukden the Old Marshal coming back the same way was assassinated by a mine. It was dangerous for the Young Marshal to come back but he managed it on troop trains dressed as a common soldier, with forced marches between rides.

When he turned up in the midst of the confusion and funeral preparations it was as if he had dropped down from heaven. He cried when he heard his father's last words were,"Has Little Six come back?" He was the sixth son of the clan.

He knew she was here. The aide stationed behind to take her out of the Pass in case of emergency had telegraphed him at the front.

"Father thought of us when he had so many things on his mind," he said to her.

"They say the Japanese did it," she said.

"Probably." His eyes shone curiously in the shadow of the army cap which he kept on even at night to hide the shaved head, part of the disguise.

To her it was a fitting end to their story, his coming back after such hardships. And they lived happily ever after. There was some truth in this ending to fairy tales which generally deal with young people and early success. What you get at that impressionable age stays with you. It was the only time when anyone can build things larger than life and in its own way lasting as long. At seventeen she had achieved the impossible,all that she had ever wanted. If there is a certain smugness in all young wives in addition to the reputed serenity of Oriental women, she was still more so, being younger and happier than any that she knew of. An unshakable placidity entered her soul like a second spine. Nothing that really mattered could happen to her any more.

"First we heard the Old Marshal had left for Mukden," he told her, "it looked as if we were retreating. We were fooling with a Ouija tray, it was a quiet night, so we thought to ask about the war. It wrote on the sand, ‘The Grand Marshal is going home.' I was laughing, ‘What wonderful fortune-tellers we are.Who doesn't know the Grand Marshal is going home?' That same night we got the telegram."

The train was wrecked on the railway bridge at the Fort of the Imperial Aunt.

He evidently found comfort in the story. If the supernatural exists in any way then maybe his father was still near. He was beset on all sides by the mourners sent by friends and foes alike.The Christian General, the Nationalists, the Japanese, the "king of Shansi" all had representatives at the funeral to pressure him into agreements, alliances, recognitions. He closed the Pass to General Long Legs and left him to be mopped up. He stopped the subsidies to Japanese personnel in Manchuria and sent for W. F. Ronald, known as the man to have with you in a pinch.

"They say they shot two people here," her old amah whispered to her.

"Where?"

"Over in the office building."

One was Yang, she heard later, the one who had got him into the morphine habit. In the evening he came in to change.

"Oh, get me the dollar in the trousers pocket."

He liked to play with the coin and had it gold-plated. He hefted it in his hand smiling.

"Last night I couldn't make up my mind about Yang and Ho so I tossed the dollar."

"No!" she said dismayed.

"People have been telling me they're unstable." The dread words "revolt" and "coup" were seldom said outright. "But you can't tell, people are jealous, and my differences with Yang are well-known. Now is not the time to remember grudges. So finally I said to myself, head for arrest, tails for execution. Three times to make sure."

"All tails?"

"All three times. I thought maybe this coin is lighter on one side. Try three more times, head for execution. And three times all head."

She shrank from the first president's round moustachioed face on the proffered coin. She did not believe in superstitions but she believed in him. He put it out of sight in his pocket quickly.

"I feel bad because of the Old Marshal."

"He'll understand now," she said.

"After a single interview with Yang, just back from studying from Japan, he had him start the munitions plant. That's how the Old Marshal hired people, whether relatives or strangers."His voice rose, thinned from distention so that she looked at him. His father could tell about people, yet had never relied on him so he must be no good. She did not figure that out at first,just thought confusedly of all the other men around his father that he disapproved of, like General Long Legs.

"That time we campaigned in the south I shared a room with Long Legs with just a curtain in between," he had said. "He called in three women and kept asking me, Have one? I just pulled the blanket over my head and pretended I was asleep."

Yet when they got to Shanghai he had played dominoes with Long Legs and the other officers in a hotel room for over a week, night and day, with singsong girls trooping in and out getting bonuses. He beat them at their own games and preferred women that were out of their reach.

"There was the furor about the virgin that Long Legs had booked from a Shanghai singsong house, before leaving for the front. A virgin for good luck, like sacrificing to the flag. It turned out that he did not ‘see red', so he wanted the madam's blood instead. Actually who dares cheat him? The girl must have had a secret lover and didn't dare tell the madam."

Still Long Legs was a man of the times like the Old Marshal while he himself was just the son, still untried after many battles.It was always seen to that he did not lose, or at least not lose face.

"I asked Yang and Ho about the plant and the railway.They had to go and look up the answers. This time I summoned them here and they were still evasive. I walked out of the room.A minute later the door opened and several officers shot them down," he whispered with a scared smile. "Ronald just heard.He must be thinking he's got into a robbers' den."

"Did you tell him why?"

"I told him about the head and tails too."

"No. What would people think?"

"He must have had a shock already seeing me so changed from the Peking days." He looked at himself in the mirror.

"You're thin. You haven't got over the trip back."

She readily saw his addiction as the rest of the household did, as an ailment that was a nuisance, though sometimes whispered about behind his back as an Achilles' heel. All he needed was the time to take the cure once the crisis of his father's death was over. Now the pressure was too great.

"Like those Peking opera singers," he said, "all the betterknown ones have to take opium to keep up the strenuous life."

"And to appease their women admirers," one of his friends said slyly.

He laughed. "They do have this problem."

There was this group of young men who used to ride with him, the sons of officers or big landowners. He invited them to hunting parties at the new villa he built at the North Graves where the Manchu emperors were buried. Fourth Miss loved the North Graves, massive architecture in the Samarkand style that the Manchus had toned down, here at its simplest in a forest of tall pines. The villa was just a group of little red brick houses. She heard there were girls at those parties. It was a rumor because of his bad reputation, he said. Another time it was some of the men's wives dropping in for the gambling after the hunt. So-and-so's wife "keeps a close watch." They both thought it was very funny.

She was still called Fourth Miss in the house but he was now known as having two wives. Big Sister was glad of her narrow escape. If Fourth Miss was not with them already he would want a divorce now that his father was dead. As it was there was no question of raising the issue in a time like this. The three years' mourning also ruled out any celebrations, a thorny point originally. A simple feast was too much like taking a concubine. "Wait and see what the Old Marshal says," the Fifth Old Concubine had said. Now the problem was solved on all sides. A few quiet kowtows within the family sufficed. Her status was equal but not legal.

The three of them lived in the same courtyard, for convenience's sake Big Sister said, so he could get his clothes and things at once instead of sending for them. It was the timehonored stipulation of wives who did not want to be left out of the picture. She generally got her way. The other two were too content to make an issue of anything. The house was a copy of the Peking palace on a small scale. Across a wall and rock garden stood the three-storeyed office building with wood curlicues and a calligraphic board in the Old Marshal's own handwriting, "Heaven's law is men's heart." Another motto over the garden gate: "Walk the straight and narrow." They were surrounded by a flock of houses for the staff and guards, the Side Arms Company and Automobile Corps.

"When the new house is ready we'll ask Ronald to stay with us," he said. "Now he's more comfortable in the hotel."

"Has he got a family?" she said.

"He was married once."

"In America?"

"No, he's never been back all these years. They met in China. She's from his home state. He must have been homesick. But she left him because he was too engrossed in China."

She laughed. "Only foreign women would mind a thing like that."

"At least that's the story. But he's known as a regular Confucius. Secretary Sung was comparing him to Confucius traveling through all the kingdoms looking for a ruler that would practise his teachings. To keep him from going south last year Old Chow specially created the Bureau of Statistics for him so he could collect figures to his heart's content. Americans believe in them. He got a thousand a month to run it. Old Chow said,‘That fool Ronald, the thousand was for him, I never expected him to hire a staff and pay out salaries.' What's more he paid them out of his own pocket after Peking fell. Nanking promised him to keep the bureau going but never paid him back in the end."

She loved to hear them talk. It gave her a feeling she had never had before, of sitting in a high pavilion open to the sun and wind looking clear across the plains to the Yellow River.It was all there before her even though muddied by all the unfamiliar proper names made still more confusing by Ronald's mispronunciations. He also said some incredible things, like he himself had paid for demonstrators against the Twenty-one Demands. In her year at college she had learned that the protest march was a milestone in the students' movement and national awakening. But she believed him, and at the same time felt a little dubious and affronted by the way everybody was made out to be such fools, Sun Yatsun for instance:

"A reporter asked, ‘Are you a socialist, Dr. Sun?' He turned to me saying, ‘Am I?' I said, ‘You're everything a Nationalist has to be.' "

"So the good doctor is finally reburied in style, beside the Ming emperors," the Young Marshal said.

"In the most grandiose sugar cake. Over ten thousand people petitioned against having their houses torn down to build the highway across town just to get the casket to the mountain."

"How is it the body is not on display after all the trouble of preserving it?"

"They don't want to be copycat to Lenin now that they broke with the Communists."

"What do you think of the new brother-in-law and successor? He's got the ancestral tablet in both hands now."

She picked up her ears. That was the man who married his old love.

"I don't really know him, except through his brothers-inlaw."

"Theirs is government by brothers-in-law."

"Was he really legally divorced?" The one time she spoke up she modestly addressed her question to the Young Marshal.They left her out of the conversation in the Oriental way with ladies.

"Yes," Ronald answered.

"Country wives are easy to handle," said the Young Marshal.

"In a case like this you can't just tuck a wife away in the country. And he'd gone as far as to turn Christian."

"What's this about his son denouncing him?"

"That's the son he sent to Russia in his Russian period.The Russians always have sons denouncing their fathers. The boy is a Youth Pioneer. A Chinese Communist underground publication printed his open letter to his mother, accusing his father of betraying the revolution."

"And kicking his mother downstairs for asking him not to go to singsong houses," the Young Marshal chortled.

"That was when he was in business in Shanghai."

"Was that the wife he divorced?" she asked. She had seen the engagement photograph of Miss Soo-hoo and him, she round-shouldered in ruffled chiffon, with smiling eyes on a rather large soft face under marcelled waves, he standing behind her in uniform, tall, thin and clean-cut. Did she love him? She got what she was looking for, the ruler of China. And she was his own choice instead of the wife his family had foisted on him.There was a great difference there.

"Is it true he made a million on the stock exchange?"

"He lost it in the crash."

"Enough to make a man join the revolution."

"He'd joined early, in army school. But after the Nationalist defeat in Shanghai many went underground, some worked on the Exchange and met in singsong houses. He seemed to have merged into the scene rather well, stayed around for ten years."

"He's good at about-facing."

"He rode a dangerous current to the top. Trouble is nothing has changed. All the old forces gathering, more civil wars. Meanwhile Nanking doesn't do a thing that makes any difference. I stayed long enough to see they're time-wasters.Now I call them Nationa-lusts."

"Yes, same old China. If only we can kill off several million people. Then maybe we can get something done."

"That's the Bolshevik method."

"As long as it works."

"I don't know about that. The Great Experiment has been on for nearly ten years now and they're still famished. Militarily Russia is the one country nobody is afraid of."

"Here at least it got us back the foreign settlements in Hankow."

"They're the least of your worries. Get enough peace and order in the rest of the country and you'll attract as much investment. You don't even use the same money in all the provinces."

"If only we can hand over the country to some reliable foreign power for twenty-five years."

"Unfortunately that can't be arranged."

"Most of my countrymen will be angry at me for saying this,but they haven't tried to get things done, or never had a chance to try."

"I can see how you got known as a radical."

"Only because I'm my father's son and could speak more freely."

"I'm glad you're not of the prevailing view blaming everything on foreigners and unequal treaties. Actually China needs more foreign capital, more boards of control, not less.I say this although I fought the Consortium twice just as a newspaperman." He launched into the story of how he had tricked them out of the land tax marked down as security.

"Ronald talks a lot but he knows how to keep his mouth shut," he told her more than a year later. "He knew about Yang and Ho. They'd sent somebody to see him in Shanghai offering him two thousand pounds to go to London and negotiate a fifteen million pound loan to develop Manchuria. He said it couldn't be done. When he first came here he spoke to those two about it but they quickly changed the subject. He thought that was odd and suspected they wanted the money for a coup.It would have meant a lot to me if he'd told me this after they were executed. But he said nothing. That was real character. No matter who comes to him for advice it's confidential."

"Then how did you get to know?"

"He just mentioned it, now that we really know each other."

Ronald persuaded him to get rid of the drug habit and took charge of his diet, introducing some of his own favorite health foods. He could argue for hours about the relative merits of agar-agar and bran. He made him cut out the parties, played golf and swam and fished with him, took him on long hikes to tire him out completely. There were worries about assassination on country lanes. The Japanese Kwantung Army officers had been yelling around ever since he recognized Nanking as the central government, "Punish Chan Shu-tan, he betrayed us."

She was happy to see the two go off like boy scouts. But his health got so bad the doctor advised complete rest and seclusion for at least a month.

"The rumors will have me dead," he said at once. "There will be uprisings, an opening for the Japanese."

He went back to the drug. "I'll be the first to go for the cure when we have the hospital for it."

There were no funds for the hospital after building the university and a modern port. Settlers poured in from north and central China where there had been wars. The latest was the biggest yet, both sides had half a million men in the field.Three hundred thousand died. Both Nanking and the Christian General and his ally "the king of Shansi" pressed the Young Marshal to join them. He took the stand against civil wars but they kept at him.

She heard Ronald say at lunch, strangely upset, "So far nobody has touched it. The one thing that represents Chinese unity as a nation."

"The Chinese just see it as part of the unequal treaties," he said.

"If they seized the Customs on the pretext of customs autonomy, why install an Englishman as commissioner?Exchange one Englishman for another, that's what I don't understand."

"Old Yin has been too cooped up in Shansi. No experience in foreign affairs."

"And to have Gravesend-Kemp of all people."

"He's unscrupulous enough. And a well-known writer."

"That makes it all right for him to do anything out here among the comic opera war lords. It's fun, and there may be a book in it."

They went to play golf. The next she heard was, "We're going in."

She thought it was agreed that he should stay out as long as possible.

"Only on condition that the Nationalists clean house and open up the government," Ronald had said. "And not just promises."

She did not want him to go to war and so was familiar with all the arguments against it——leaving Manchuria half empty,Japan would move in. Manchuria was more industrialized than any other part of China. The Nationalist representative had been all agog when he was taken over the munitions plant and it took three hours to drive him over the lot. The country was so big and potentially rich it would be more profitable to develop it than join in civil wars. In the final accounting the Old Marshal's wars had cost more than he got out of it.

"So you have your isolationists too," Ronald had said.

"Why does Ronald hate that Englishman so much?" she asked.

"Oh, Gravesend-Kemp. He's the kind of foreigner in China who's out for all he can get, and Ronald himself has always been scrupulous about money."

"They've known each other a long time?" Perhaps wives are prone to suspect their husband's best friend of using him.She felt uneasy and guilty.

"In Peking. Gravesend-Kemp wrote many books on China,said to be brilliant. Ronald also writes."

" ‘Literary men are contemptuous of each other; it has been so since ancient times,' "she quoted laughing.

"And when was that said?"

"I don't know. About fifteen hundred years ago."

The coming test hung heavy over them. He was to enter what the newspapers called the Great War of the Central Plains and the Battle over the Nation. Japan was behind the other side.She never wanted to put him to any tests because they were unfair. The old saying was Do not judge a hero by success or defeat.

He went inside the Pass and sent for her as promised, along with Big Sister, as soon as he had found a house in Peking,avoiding the Marshal's House and any identification with the old regime. This time the Manchurians had come as the army of peace. The war was over the minute he appeared over the border.

His favorite story of the campaign was about GravesendKemp.

"He wrote me at headquarters. Offered me two million in cash and a million a month if I would keep the Customs independent. I asked him to come and see me.

" ‘Why did you do that?' Ronald said.

" ‘I want to see an Englishman lose face.'

" ‘Be careful. People will take it that you just didn't come to terms.'

" ‘You'll be there as witness.'

" ‘I don't know. He'd assume that you're interested. If you do work out something you'd have gained a friend and lost another. Because I'll have to leave you.' "

Ronald had threatened this before. He had happened to run into an old acquaintance in Mukden, an English baronet in the Indian civil service and then in the legation.

"What are you doing here?" Ronald asked.

"The Young Marshal asked me to be his advisor."

The Young Marshal announced at dinner at home, "Ronald threw down the gauze hat," the hat of office. "Jealous as a woman."

"Jealous as a woman indeed," Big Sister said. "Put out your hand and feel your own conscience."

"So Gravesend-Kemp came to headquarters. ‘You simply must reappoint me,' he said.

"I said Why?

" ‘Because of the money we can make together.'

" ‘By robbing the Customs.'

" ‘I wouldn't know what to do if you won't help me.'" ‘Ask Yin Shih-san.'

" ‘He's run away.'

" ‘Then you run away.'

" ‘Will you give me a week?'

" ‘Why?'

" ‘I have to take care of my staff.'

" ‘Give you a week to rob the Customs! I'll give you one day to hand it back to the proper authorities.'

"He hurried off. Two days later one of his employees shot him for the loot. Heaven knows it's difficult for a foreigner to get himself killed in China. Probably the first civilian since the Boxers. And for once England didn't send gunboats."

In those first hazy days of incredulous triumph the story was the one thing that made it real for her. Gravesend-Kemp was practically the only casualty of the war. The three hundred thousand anonymous dead was before he got in. Yin of Shansi still had the province to himself after temporary asylum in Dairen. The Christian General had retired with his wife and choice troops up a scenic mountain in Shantung. Nanking was satisfied to leave it at that. Keeping their names on the wanted list throughout the country was enough punishment. But for the death of the Englishman it was as baffling and dreamlike as a leaky pillow fight, punching into clouds of fluff. She got the impression that the interview at headquarters was the first high point of his life. He had finally proved himself and before Ronald who was the world.

"One odd thing," Ronald said, "in his first book you can see what impressed him most in the Boxers Rebellion was the looting. To think he'd die of it after thirty years."

" ‘Peking Indiscreet'," she said.

"Yes. It's a good first-hand account. You can see him drooling."

"He also has a short story called ‘Loot'."

"Oh? What's it about?"

"It's the same story."

"The British and Indians and Cossacks looting the palace?"

"Yes, he rewrote that into a short story eight years later."

"I'll be damned."

"I never knew you read him," the Young Marshal said happily.

"I got curious. You were talking about him."

He liked to show her off to Ronald but she generally kept quiet. Ronald was careful with her and was correct in paying her less attention than if she was an unmarried girl of the house. He loved to tease young girls, English-speaking ones perforce. But when a man had two wives it was safer to assume that they were old-fashioned, no matter how modern they seemed.

"He justified it all along," Ronald said. "They were Drake's pirates looting from the looters. The Manchu themselves had got it from the Ming emperors. As to the foreign-manned customs, theirs is the fruit of imperialist exploitation, although this may sound too Bolshie for him."

"So he was just doing what he had always believed in," the Young Marshal said.

"Writers are not supposed to. Barking dogs you know."

He was made Deputy Commander-in-chief of the Armed Forces of China and flew to Nanking with Ronald to attend the National Assembly. Rumors said he would never come back.Nanking would hold him or his father's old officers would take over Manchuria. He came back in two months. He had put an end to the war lords' era. The next time his wives went with him in their private plane. It was the twentieth century at last, thirty years late and he with two wives but he got in. China was in.

