5



"The sound of the wind is not good these few days," Aunt Hung and the amahs were whispering.

She thought the fighting was over in Manchuria? Something about an assassination just outside Peking. Nobody went out.The front gate was barred with big water jars pushed against it.If the Young Marshal's car had come for her she was not even told.

She had already gone to bed when her amah came in and whispered straight-faced, "The Young Marshal is here."

He was at the door. She dressed hurriedly.

"Surprised?"

"So late!" she said, as if otherwise there was nothing untoward about receiving men guests in the bedroom. The amah was gone, appropriately leaving the door slightly open.

"How did you get in?"

"I forced my way in. I told you I would if you don't come."

"You didn't."

But he was in uniform complete with pistol in holster.

"Does the front of the house know?"

"No, I came by the backdoor nearest you. A servant let me in. He knows who I am."

She thrilled at the magic of power that enabled him to pass through walls. It felt odd seeing him in this room that was outgrown, almost dingy, filled with the debris of childhood now behind her. But she was glad to break the spell that confined them to their phantom house. Here they were out in the everyday world. She had thought of him so much in this room.Couldn't he tell that? She used to come back at night when she had scarcely seen him at one of those birthday parties but with impressions so strong and so at odds with her old room she had to fix her eyes on the window as if listening to music. The reflection of weak lamplight browned the empty black panes framed in black-and-gilt wood. Without going to the window she was standing right in front of it, open to a damp wind blowing like a scarf on her face as the feeling came over her with the air of reality against her cheeks, then coming unstuck again, the multitude of filmy patterns drawing away, the exultant singing receding. Compared to such clamorous streams of sensations his actual presence here was ghostlike.

"Is there going to be fighting?"

"Lots of rumors around just now."

There was no telling whether the amah would help keep up the pretense by bringing tea. Perhaps she was starting the stove this minute.

"Everybody is staying home with locked doors?"

"Afraid of looting."

"Who are they afraid of? The Christian General has run away."

"There still are Fung's troops here. At the west city gate."

It was never quite clear to her how the Christian General kept on as a lesser partner to the Old Marshal, and still more confusing after their falling out.

"Who was this man that was assassinated?"

"Hsu Chow-ting," he mumbled looking away. Another of those names she was not supposed to remember. "It was Fung's doing."

"On a train."

"Yes. I could have been on that train." He half laughed.

"What?" That other world of his, the sea of unmemorable names and boring political dinners, suddenly reared up and flooded the room.

"I was at the dinner that saw Hsu off and he asked me to come along for the ride. I was thinking of running over to Tientsin anyway. They were going to mine the tracks, but with so many troop trains, the schedule was all upset. In the end they just dragged him off the train. That's how everybody knows who did it."

"How lucky you didn't go."

"That's why I was thinking, I don't care, I wanted to see you so I came."

She smiled back weakly. Was the amah coming back or no?

"Is the Old Marshal angry?"

"Of course. To have this happen so near the capital."

"Is there going to be war?"

"There's a lot of confusion just now. Premier Tuan has resigned. Hsu was his man. Just back from a trip abroad."

He got up and closed the door.

"No, you better go."

"It's just as bad to go now as later."

She watched him hang his belt on the bed rails, the dreamlike juxtaposition of the pistol holster against the bulbous iron railings ringed with faded gold.

"Aunt Hung is sure to hear."

"She probably knows already."

"No she doesn't."

"Everybody has gone to bed."

"She can see my light is still on."

"Turn it off."

"No, don't. I want to see you or I wouldn't know who it is."

He looked displeased at the very idea that there could be anybody else. But she had to see his face hanging over her like a lotus risen out of the sea, otherwise she wouldn't know what was happening to her, just pain in the darkness. The mosquito net was half tucked up so he could grab the pistol in case of emergency. If this got known what was to happen to Aunt Hung? And the amah? She was fouling their lots, making it impossible for them to go on with their meagre lives in this house. It was sinful, yet curiously safe like burrowing into the attic. For once they had the whole night, as lifelong as to the insects cheeping in the courtyard. She liked the first contact when she seemed to be getting him at last, a soft smooth flesh bait coolly slipping out of the toothless bites, a tantalization that melted the knees. But it became painful immediately.

"Say something nice to me so I can finish right away. Say you're Chan Shu-tan's man."

Somehow she just could not say it.

"Say you like me."

"I like you. I like you."

Off he went on his frantic ride and rode on after an arrow shot in the back made him grunt and pant, finally falling forward still hanging on, the hot flood pouring out of him.

"There're mosquitoes."

"Were you bitten? Where?" He licked a fingertip and rubbed the spot.

She smiled. He must have learned that as a small boy in the country. They were still safely in the middle of the night. He was a toy she could take to bed with her, a jade piece to fondle beside the pillow. With the light out she could just make out his profile facing up.

"You're not as happy as I am." She thought he looked sad.

"It's because I'm older. Like a child that cried and cried for an apple, still sniveling when he has got it."

"You've always had everything you wanted."

"No, I didn't."

She was sorry and wished she could go into all the years without her, the deserted courtyards yellowed by an ancient sun.She would rush in shouting "I'm here! I'm here!"

He leaned over the side to light a cigarette from the incense coil on the floor, supposed to keep mosquitoes away.

"All the talk was about Hsu Chow-ting at tonight's dinner."

"Why was he killed anyway?"

"He was getting up a coalition against the Christian General.The southeast gave him a royal welcome on his way back. But he was made much of everywhere. He was asked to review troops in England. When he found there were only two seats on the platform for the king and queen he looked displeased.So George V got up and let him sit with Queen Mary while he stood with the officers."

"Was he an army man?"

"Foreigners called him General Hsu. They call everybody general. He's a politician really. Little fat man. At a garden party in Buckingham Palace his senior secretary brought his wife,over fifty, with bound feet and dressed in Chinese clothes, but her husband wanted her to wear a big straw hat with flowers. A young secretary was against it. But her husband being a scholar with an imperial degree, second grade, knew everything in the world. ‘Is there a foreign woman who'd go out in daytime without a hat?' he said. It was about six hundred yards to the royal tent and her bound feet could not walk fast. The wind blew her hat off. The young officer ran to get it but it rolled left and right and up and down and took a long time to catch.George V laughed with both hands holding his belly."

She tried not to be heard laughing from outside the room.He pulled her hand over and closed it around the sleeping bird,strangely tame and small, wrinkled and a little moist.

"Hsu spoke to the young man afterwards: ‘You may not have stopped to consider, it's great disrespect to the English king.' The secretary said, ‘Then what about the American chief justice? He was slapping the king's back, jumping up and down laughing.' Hsu said no more. The next day the London Times gave an account of the chase without comment, but criticized Chief Justice Hughes although he's an old friend of the king."

"Where else did they go?"

"America. All over. In Russia Hsu had a debate with their foreign minister Chinchirin. There he was welcomed as a head of state."

"Why?"

"No Chinese is taken seriously unless he's a military man.And he was an old-timer of the Pei-yang clique."

"I'd like to see Paris and Italy."

"We'll go. In a couple of years."

The drum and bell towers sounded the half hour. They were still deep inside China, deeper and older by the minute as the warning against dangers in the dark led far back into the centuries.

"Old Tuan telegraphed him at Shanghai not to come back.Old Tuan was afraid for him. But he thought it would be an international joke if the Special Envoy dared not come back to Peking. Also because of the fighting in Manchuria, he thought to take advantage of the situation, the old fox. He saw a chance for Old Tuan. So he borrowed a car from the British consulate in Tientsin and was driven to Peking flying the British flag on the radiator cap. Somehow he didn't take precautions this time.It's fate."

"He just took a train."

"Yes, supposed to be a special train, just a car hitched to the regular train. Brass bands to welcome him at every stop and a long wait to water the engine. The station was brightly lighted and surrounded with troops, as grand as his reception in Moscow. An officer came aboard and asked for Mr. Hsu. The Envoy is not feeling well, his secretary said and asked the man to sit in the upper seat but he took the lower."

"Even on a train there's an upper and lower seat?"

"Not berths either. With us Chinese it's always ceremony first, war later. So they chatted. The officer said he was sent by Commander Chang and where was Mr. Hsu? The secretary insisted he was not well. Hsu was in another compartment sleeping off his wine. The voices woke him up. He came out rubbing his eyes. ‘Didn't I tell you the Envoy is not well?' the secretary said."

He pulled her hand back.

"The officer stood up. When Hsu finally got them all seated again he said, ‘I'm not feeling well, had to refuse all invitations along the way.' ‘Commander Chang has been waiting all evening. Will Mr. Hsu please alight.' ‘There's no time.'‘The train will wait.' ‘I have vicious influenza. I'll call on the Commander another time.' ‘There's a tea party at headquarters to welcome Mr. Hsu.' ‘What tea party, at midnight?' ‘Urgent consultation.' ‘What's so urgent? I've already sent somebody to Mongolia to talk over everything with Mr. Fung.' And the secretary put in, ‘Mr. Fung and Mr. Hsu are like one family.Nothing between them that cannot be arranged.' But the officer signalled with a handkerchief and about a dozen soldiers swarmed up and helped Hsu off the train."

"How is it they still have headquarters near here?"

"They're winding up their affairs along the railroad."

She would never understand how two war lords could share Peking each with a railway to himself, and one allowing the other to clear out in such a leisurely fashion after a fight.

"They shot him at headquarters?"

"No, no, in the fields, pitch dark. A great scandal as it is.The Christian General stamping his feet at the way they bungled his plan."

These people became little funereal dolls in green glaze jackets and yellow pants with worn earthen patches, that they could examine together with their heads on one pillow mat.

"Old Tuan himself touched it off. He'd always played Fung off against us, now he was scared at the upset, worried what Fung was going to do next, cornered in Mongolia, his hundreds of thousands of troops falling apart. So this is what he did next.The news of Old Tuan not coming to office for several days so unnerved him he struck down the old man's righthand man.Left to himself Old Tuan is terrified of him, dared not talk loud even in his own house."

"He'd hear in Mongolia?"

"He has spies everywhere. Everybody is followed. He'd know I'm here tonight."

She was electrified and almost had a warm feeling for the Christian General, the confidante who would not tell on them.

"Wouldn't it be dangerous when you go out of here?"

"No."

"There's not going to be war?"

"I guess there still has to be a show-down."

"Because of the assassination?"

"Well anyway, with Hsu dead his anti-Communist coalition seems to be coming true. Everybody set on toppling Fung."

"He's a Christian and a Communist too."

"He's a fake. Russia pays him sixty thousand a month not counting all the arms he get."

"Then he's not a real Communist, just pretending?"

"That doesn't make him any better. To hear people talk of the red menace, it's hung shui mung sheuh, great flood and predatory animals. It seems to me there are worse things, in a country where everybody's so poor. I suppose to older people it means the end of all standards. Like the Old Marshal,Communists are the one thing he hates."

"There aren't many?"

"We've caught many. Some college students too. A pity they were used by Russia."

"They're killed when they're caught."

"Yes."

She had seen the occasional head strung on the electric pole by the city gate. "Don't look," the amah would say as their car or ricksha passed it. She just got an impression of all the features on the face being pulled up by the roots of the hair like Peking opera actors who wear these tight net kerchieves. A red streak here and there on the cheek and over the brows seemed part of the make-up. She was afraid but as long as nobody knew who it was——The wash amah Li Paw had once said that a man from her village was caught. She told the story when they were all sitting in the courtyard taking the breeze at night, the amahs on low stools, Fourth Miss lying on her back on a cot of sliced bamboo that made a smooth slab as cold as a tombstone. The big black sky pin-pointed with stars bore down on her with all its weight, a tremendous crushing dome that the eye could not endure. She was looking for the Dipper lying down as in an old poem. That summer night itself seemed like a thousand years ago, although it had been right outside here in the same courtyard.

"Selling candy dolls when they caught him and took him to Headquarters. Catching people all over."

"That's the way it is nowadays," said another amah.Everybody spoke in a scratchy whisper when it came to current affairs.

"Scares you to death to hear them tell it. On the day of execution the judge sits behind the aproned table, with two lines of soldiers before him carrying rifles. The four prisoners kneel in a row. Four markers are lying on the table, stuck on bamboo splits. The judge checks the names, picks up his writing brush and runs a red stroke through the name on a marker and tosses it down like a spear. At this all the guards give a big yell. One of them snatches it up and sticks it on the back of a prisoner's collar. One by one all four are marked. Suddenly the judge kicks the table over, turns and runs away. To scare off the shah."

"What's that?" said Fourth Miss. The others tittered at her question.

"Never heard of the return of the shah?" Aunt Hung said."The dead coming back three days after death."

"Shah is the ghost?"

"Or the demon of death itself. I don't really know. Ask Li Paw."

"They say it's a big bird. People hide on the day the shah returns, to keep out of harm's way. But some were curious and sprinkled ashes on the floor. They found bird prints."

"Shah is said to be around whenever there is killing or even a thought of killing," Aunt Hung said. "That's why the judge has to protect himself."

She was sitting up by now glad to be surrounded by familiar figures in the dark.

"The prisoners stripped to the waist are paraded on a mule cart, a column of troops in front, a column behind and two rows on either side. The execution supervisor comes at the end riding a horse, with a red sash over his shoulder like a bridegroom.Two trumpeters clear the road blowing the foreign tune for the charge, da da dee da da dee. And all the soldiers yell, ‘Sha-ah!Kill!' And the crowd shouts after them, ‘Sha-ah!'"

"Tch! These people," said another amah.

Another half snickered. "At the gate house they always say ‘Go see the beheading.' "

"These men! And with so much time to themselves. Not like us."

"Go on, Li Paw, what happens next?" said Fourth Miss,and this also made them laugh.

"What happens? Outside the city gate the four are lined up kneeling. The executioner comes up to the first man, claps him hard on the back of the neck for size, swings the sword once and kicks the head away. He was getting to number four who saw it all. That was the man from my village. He fainted, and woke up lying on the prison floor. He was the execution companion."

"Execution companion," Aunt Hung bit into the words dubiously. "Yes, there's the guest of honor and there're others invited just to keep him company."

"They let him out in a couple of days. They weren't so sure he was a spy."

"Then why didn't they just keep him in prison?" Fourth Miss said.

"And feed him for years? They just wanted to give him a scare. But he died a few months after he got home."

"Fear split his gall and no wonder," Aunt Hung said.

"Hey ya, in times like these," said Li Paw, "It's a good thing that in a big deep house you don't get to hear things."

Somehow she did not feel like telling him the story although it was before his time. It must have been in Wu Panhu's days. Surely they did things differently now? But he was always touchy on the point that nothing really changed.

He flicked cigarette ashes into the incense dish on the floor."I've got a sore throat from whispering."

"Don't let's talk."

"We'll fall asleep."

"Maybe you'd better go now. Before it's light."

He reflected for a moment. "It's all right. I'll wake up before five."

"How do you know you would?"

"I'm used to it in camp."

"If there is war you'll be going." She had tried not to say this.

"I'll have somebody watch out for you."

"Do you ever sleep with your hand here?"

"When I was little. It seemed the safest place to put it,somehow."

"Me too, but the amah always pulled it away so I stopped doing it."

But his hand tucked between her legs seemed all right, like hand in pocket. He woke her with a kiss. It was grey all round.

"No. No, aren't you going?" She cried when he threw a leg over her and slid up.

For a while it was not sore. She was still half dreaming cradled on a rough sea. Their boat had gone out in the eerie uniform greyness. But their stale faces smelled safe, reminder of a night's sleep in bed.

She sat up as he dressed, snatching a feel at his shoulders,back and elbows.

"Don't get up. The man will be around to show me out."

"Don't wear your shoes."

He hesitated a moment. It would embarrass him. "No, it's all right."

She heard his footsteps going down the stone-paved corridor, excruciatingly distinct to the end. Her heart went cold. She knew for certain now that Aunt Hung knew. Still she tidied the bed and picked up the cigarette butts in the tin dish of incense coil. When she washed her face she managed to wash the hidden towel. Soaked in the basin of hot water it smelled faintly of thin rice gruel, also thought of as a source of life.





