4



"Fifth Old Concubine of the Marshal's House has sent a car for Fourth Miss," the message came to her courtyard from her father's.

A man servant showed her to the Young Marshal's study.She stopped at the door smiling.

"Come in, come in. A good thing you came. Nothing to do today. Show you the tennis court. Just been put in. Do you play?"

"No."

"Ping pong surely."

"No."

The man would be back with tea. They sat waiting in silence, he with bent head and a slight smile as if he was holding a cup of water he was afraid to spill.

The man finally came and was gone.

"I have news for you."

"I guess it was your trick."

"Sit over here. You don't want people to hear."

"Who wants to hear such nonsense?"

"Tch, people are worried for you. Did you hear anything?"She shook her head. "Good."

"You made it all up."

"Don't be without conscience. Do you know why nothing more was said? I had people drop a hint to the other side so they wouldn't go any further."

"What did you tell them?"

"That you're spoken for, what else?"

She beat him with fists. "Honest, what did you say?"

"Just that Fifth Old Concubine has a match in mind for you, only you're too young, it has to wait a few years."

"What if Father hears?"

"What of it? Nothing wrong with that."

"Maybe they won't let me come here any more."

"If you don't come I'll come to your house with a gun."

She wished she was locked up so he would come for her."You're just fooling."

"No."

He pulled her to his lap where she sat with bowed head feeling his eyes glow beside her face like a jewel on her ear.He breathed her in. What if they could only have moments like this, she thought, it already seemed like a whole day. Time slowed down to eternity.

"Your eyebrows go like this," she traced them with a finger,then along the eyelids that fluttered down at her touch, and carefully down the center of the nose, checking each item to see what she had bought. He looked all new. Ownership made a difference, the way a picture card differed from a picture in a book.

"You haven't been to Peitaiho? Tsingtao is still better.We'll go. You learn to swim. If only I can have one night's sleep holding you like this."

Her smile stiffened slightly.

"Just hold you. Once when I was little I went out hunting and caught a deer. I wanted to take it home and keep it. We rolled over and over on the ground, I just will not let go. In the end I was so tired I just fell asleep. When I woke up it was gone."

She hugged him tight to squash the emptiness in his arms.

"It was quite big. Much bigger than I at the time."

"Did you have a gun?"

"No, I wasn't allowed to. Just bow and arrow and a knife."

"That was in Manchuria."

"Yes, it's good hunting country."

"Is it very cold?" Her mother had been a singsong girl there when her father was viceroy. Having been raised as her father's daughter only she never thought of herself as half Manchurian.Actually she looked rather like him with the same chiseled oval face and straight eyes. He drew away to look at her smiling.

"I'd eat you, but then there'd be no more."

"Somebody's coming." She heard a sound in the courtyard.

"Nobody comes here."

"All of us were here the other day."

"Nobody's let in when I'm here alone."

Alone with someone? Like the Third Miss Chu? It no longer mattered. They were the only two people in a cluttered world where she had to be careful not to step on all the chess figures and bric-a-brac scattered on the ground. She felt herself lumbering in sudden tallness.

"Young Marshal, topside calls," a voice shouted from down the corridor.

His father had visitors for him. He came back in nearly an hour to sit her on his knees again and stroke her ankle. At dusk he was called away once more. After a while the servant came to announce that the car would take her home.

The next time Fifth Old Concubine sent for her the car took her to a house she had never seen before in a long alley off a quiet street. The chauffeur held the door open. She hesitated and drew the head scarf over her face the way ladies kept out of the dust on ricksha rides. She went in with the filmy turquoise face past uniformed guards playing mahjong in a lighted room off the front court. He was waiting for her in the next courtyard.

"Whose house is this?"

"Mine. I have to have some place to go to. Never any peace in the house."

"I never knew you have your own house."

"I don't get to come here often. That's why it's in such a state. Come take a look around."

"Nobody else here?"

"No one."

It was like playing house in a deserted building. They both had ideas of what to do with all the half empty rooms. The bedroom was fully furnished however, complete with bottles and jars on the dressing table glinting in the half dark with curtains drawn.

"Who lives here?"

He closed the door quickly. "It's a guest room. Sometimes I have friends over to play cards all night. This other room has a brick bed, I was going to have it taken out and put in floor boards so we can dance."

They made the round.

"Does the Third Miss Chu come here often?"

"Yes, she was here once or twice."

She did not talk much afterwards. Back in the parlor he said, "You're different. We'll always be together."

"Can't."

"Why?"

"Your wife."

"That was only on account of the Old Marshal. I've always been fair to her. After all it wasn't her idea. I'll come to some arrangement with her, but it's a matter between me and the Old Marshal." He always said the Old Marshal as if he was just one of his father's officers. Filial obedience was an old virtue that embarrassed him a little, he liked to put it under military discipline.

"No use saying anything just now, you're too young. It will only get you locked up."

"You said you'd come for me with a gun."

"Still best not to train a gun on a father-in-law."

She twisted away laughing. Somehow the new prospects did not surprise her. Their hopelessness had been no pretext with her, yet was already forgotten. Anything was possible after the miraculous coincidence of his loving her too.

"I wanted to give up this place but it's difficult to find another so near the house but out of the way. And there has to be room for the guards."

"What if they go and fetch me at the Marshal's House?"

"They'll telephone me. Plenty of time to get over there."

"Itchy." She pinned down the hands groping up her funnel sleeves.

"What's all this you've got on? It's too late today, I'll drive you to West Hill some time."

"You can drive?"

"It's easy."

"We can ride donkeys in West Hill."

"We'll rent donkeys. I'd like to live there. The foreign reporter Ronald has a villa there, did over a temple in the emperor's hunting park. He was telling about it the other day.In the first Chih-Feng war he walked around the front lines in West Hill and saw a wire trailing on the ground, so he picked it up and rolled it up as he went. Some of our men came yelling to him. He just stuck up a thumb and said, "Old Marshal very good," then shook his head: "Wu Pan-hu no good."They laughed and let him go. With the field telephone cut off the Manchurian army fell back and that turned the tide. So according to him he lost us the war."

"He wasn't afraid to tell it?"

"He invited me to come and see his electric bell wired with our piece of wiring. These foreigners think they're so brave. They walk into a rain of bullets and it stops, for fear of killing a foreigner. Where else but in China can you have such adventures without the least danger?"

"They say you like foreigners."

"They're fun to be with. More outspoken. I hate flatterers most of all." He leaned forward to knock off cigarette ashes and turned around to kiss her, a deer taking a lackadaisical sip from a pool. A lock of hair hanging down his brow, the head came down at her like a lowering sky or the quick nightfall in the mountains. She dipped dizzily into darkness.

It was still sunny afternoon and dead quiet with all the empty courtyards around them. Precisely because she was unused to such privacy her family seemed to be watching. Not her father whose remoteness and dignity made it inconceivable under the circumstances, but the others, the women of the house always waiting to put in a bad word, and Aunt Hung and her own amah who were responsible for her. They took the shape of birds carved roughly of unpainted wood perched on the rafters and over the door. She never looked up but she had some idea of them, round-eyed hook-beaked hens over a foot high, some larger, some smaller. She herself was up there looking down out of the wooden eye of double circles. His hand strained at her trouser leg and long silk under-pants and slid absently down the stocking. Sitting in his lap she had the oddest sensation of being flogged gently by some muffled piston or an atavistic thumping tail. The amahs had jokes about the tail bone at the base of the spine and had made her feel her own when she was a child. "It's the stump of the tail that has been cut off.Mankind had tails before." She doubted it happened even while it seemed to be going on underground. She did not want to ask him, it probably had to do with sex. Perhaps the only ladylike thing to do was to ignore it.

Starting from twilight the Drum Tower sounded every half hour with eight drum beats. The Bell Tower immediately tolled its answer, announcing the coming of night and the moral curfew.

"Funny I never noticed it before," she said. "It sounds like ancient times."

"The towers were built in Ming Dynasty."

"It's been like this every night since then?"

"Yes, the Manchus continued it."

"Why do we still do it? There're clocks now."

"Why indeed? We've been fifteen years a republic and nothing is changed."

He pulled a bell cord and shouted "Serve dinner" at the approach of footsteps. The dinner was set out in the next room with no one around. He smiled at her over his rice bowl. Eating at the same table by themselves they were real householders at last. Her embarrassments tied her in such knots she could not finish eating.

"What's the matter?"

"Nothing. You eat."

A new towel sprinkled with cologne was spread over a basin of hot water on the side table to keep it hot. When he had finished she put the towel in and wrung it dry for him, turning to go even before she had handed it over, ashamed of acting so wifely. Leaning away she smiled over her shoulder all in one quick movement. Entranced he caught her hand but she pulled away.

"Come out here," he called.

They looked at the moon on the corridor walk. He held her to him and the warmth of his loins swayed her back like a blown flame so that she laughed in surprise. The moonlight was blue on the scarlet pillars.

"Just think, I almost didn't come back."

She clutched him. "When? The last time you were in Mukden?"

"Yes, there was trouble. One of our officers turned on us.The Christian General was in it too."

"I seemed to have heard there was fighting outside the Pass."

"A near thing. The bulk of our troops marching on Mukden, only a few miles away. The Old Marshal's train all stoked up ready to leave."

"Leave for where?"

"Dairen."

"Dairen…That's where you were going."

"I suppose. I was cut off from Mukden at the time. There was even talk that I was mixed up in the uprising."

"How was that?" she whispered.

"Just because Koo and I belonged to the same company and got along all right."

"How can they say such a thing? Your own father. The Old Marshal didn't believe it?"

"The Old Marshal was very angry."

"But…Not now?"

"It's not mentioned any more. I was at fault of course,should have been more watchful."

That was more reason why he could not speak to his father about her or anything else just now. But all this was nothing compared to the chilling terror of their nearly missing each other, that seemed to dissolve his solidity right in front of her eyes and between her fingers. But here was the blue-limned face smiling down at her and the cool pressure of his lips. Here he was in Peking, the drum and bell continuing the night watch,louder outdoors, with a more pressing sense of the wonders and dangers of the night. For a moment it opened up the palaces and rabbit warrens of time behind the old city, all the double doors looking straight through one another as they swung open,to make a cavern or tunnel.

"You'd better go," he said. "We won't go by the same car."

"Fifth Old Concubine is so fond of you," Aunt Hung said."Why not adopt you?"

"I don't want it."

"Silly. It's good to have a rich adopted mother. She'll make a good match for you."

"Aunt Hung never says a decent thing." She slumped forward to rest her chin on the table, fiddling with little objects at hand.

"No, really. Leave it to your father and you'd be given away as present. Of course this is just between you and me."

"Talk away, nobody's listening."

"I know you won't tell."

Was there a double meaning? No. She quickly put it out of her mind.

"Your Aunt Hung didn't say anything?" he asked.

"No."

"If they know you come here where we're all by ourselves they'd certainly think you've been taken advantage of. Have you?" Laughing he tried to look into her face which she kept turned away. "Have you?"

She clung to the side of the sofa bending over it.

"If they really ask you what are you going to say?"

"The truth."

"Then it's still not too late for them to marry you off."

"Then I'll lie," she said after a moment.

"That's no use. Well, worst come to the worst I'll kidnap you."

"The Old Marshal will be very angry."

"That goes without saying. He has a special regard for your father."

"What shall we do?"

"Nevermind. I'm in bad standing with the Old Marshal anyway."

She did not like to lie down beside him on the sofa but this way they were able to gaze into each other's face longer than ever. The only annoying thing was that each had one arm too many. After various efforts to tuck it away he said, "Chop it off." The afternoon sunlight made a small rainbow on the wall mirror. She could not remember ever having known such peace and safety. Not a thought stirred in the golden desert-like calm with the mountain ridge of the sofa back looming on the horizon. It began to get dark in the room. Her smile deepened with the twilight. A look of dread pinched his eyes small. He buried his face in her loosened hair, wavy from the braiding.

"I don't know why, just now you were like a ghost."

"What kind of ghost?"

"The usual. A man lost his way and came upon a big house in the wilderness. He was invited in for dinner with the beautiful lady of the house. After spending the night together he walked out and looked back and no house, just a burial mound where the house had stood."

So he was afraid like her that it was all make-believe inside this door.

"There's that feeling of no night or day, just a dim yellowbrown sun like in the city of the dead."

"It's because we're cooped up here all day."

"I've never spent so much time with anybody in all my life,"he laughed embarrassedly. "People are asking what I'm so busy at these days, why I'm never around."

"I wonder what they are saying behind your back."

"I'm dying to tell them."

"I won't mind if they say I'm your slave girl."

Slave girl was easier to say than concubine. But even as she was saying it, feeling moved by it herself, there was a faint suspicion at the back of her mind. Perhaps she was capable of shouting any time "Pieng ni duh, fooled you!" and run out laughing. She could stop any time. She would sit in his lap, the unbuttoned flap of her jacket hypocritically kept in place, the layers of opened trousers top and untied belts piled around her middle. There was something terrifying about the long reach down those warm folds and her hiding in the cupboard waiting to be discovered. His touch palpitated like a heart pumping thunders of blood through her and a listening silence.Their faces were close, yet remote, both with eyes down, idols towering half out of the little temple they shared, contemplating the thief in the dark prying at the ruby eye in the navel.

His head rubbing furrily against her bare breast frightened and revolted her slightly. Where did she get such a grown son to suckle? She saw him first regarding the goosepimply pink nipple with an expressionless eye before taking it in his mouth.The half itchy drawing on it also grated and needled like pressing it through a wire sieve. She looked down worriedly at the small pale triangle being flattened as he turned to the other one. Finally he raised his head blindly, a red haze over the eyes,and picked up his cigarette. She straightened her clothes and went to the mirror to tidy her bangs. Shaded by the big black square, now in place, she smiled at him and covered the slight awkwardness by stretching her arms downward with fingers interlaced in the attitude of a suppressed yawn. This jerked her sleeves up like the uptilted roof corners of a pavilion, and under the trousers the white L's of feet, stockings and slippers all white. He extended a hand without lifting it and she flew back to his side.

Being ignorant of any kind of basic rule between the sexes,even lying naked under him she felt free to get up and leave any time. A soft weightless bag made a disconcerting vacuum in the middle of her load. She ran her hand up and down his narrow back but when he grew restive she was close-faced and rigid.This had to wait for the "cave room and flowered candles", the wedding night going back to the cave-dweller's time. Even he would blame her if she did not keep something back for that night. And although she would not let herself think it, what if this house was to turn into a burial mound behind her one day the minute she stepped out the door? What happened here was only between the two of them, melting away without a trace when they each went back to their lives outside.

He remembered an appointment he could not get out of.The car would come back for her. She realized afterwards that he was a little angry, which was enough to make her feel lost.

"This is the only way. Then nobody can do anything about us ever," he said.

She nodded slightly with her head turned away on the sofa cushion. They never went near the bedroom.

"No, it's impossible," she said half laughing as if asked to swallow a bottle or rather a grooved ringed earthen jar.

"It hurts."

"It won't in a minute." He stopped several times.

"No, it hurts."

"We have to get this settled today."

The senseless ramming went on, as impossible as ever, now getting to be a racking pull splitting her into two. A sudden rush of air was forced up her chest. Between tossings of her head from side to side she saw him look thoughtfully into her face.

"I feel like throwing up."

He kept kissing her and hurrying back to his business,traditionally called the joy of fish in water and the dance of mandarin ducks with necks crossed. More like a dog butting at a tree stump for some reason of its own. She burst out laughing,finally laughing so hard there were tears in her eyes. He grinned ruefully, deflated. After a final crouch on all fours to examine the ground closely he stretched out to kiss her lightly and hold her to his side.

"It counts as done," he said face-savingly.

Peace returned and with it the luxury of pretending they could fall asleep and stay the night. To her surprise he was asleep. The Chinese room with western furniture had changed curiously in the dark yellow light of the standing lamp. The familiar tables and bureaus were ranged lower all round, farther away, backed against the wall to keep out of the fight. He lay curled up on his side, suddenly common-looking and unknown,the first man newly created that could be anybody, not worth the labors that produced him.

But it always seemed years before they met again and left her quite changed. They grinned at each other with the secret between them. It made them sit apart and talk of other things.When he pulled her to her feet she said no, it would hurt.

"We have to fix this."

He pulled her by the hand toward the sofa. There seemed a long way to go and the length of their arms left her a few steps behind. She found herself walking in a procession of muffled women. His wife and the others? But they had no identity for her. She joined the line as if they were the human race.





