3



She pestered a cousin to do her hair for her just for fun,curl the fringe with hot tongs and top it with a smoky rise. The pigtails were left untouched, tied for two inches with tightly wound pink silk thread. The mass of coarsened waves somehow set off the face and the lacquered plaits. She did not know whether she would be going to the Marshal's House the next day, one of the concubines' birthday. They may not celebrate this year. Both father and son were said to be in Mukden. She sat up all night sleeping face down in her arms on a table. The hair's slightly burnt smell excited her.

He was home. But as often happened at those circuses at the Chans' there came a point when the great day streamed by passing over her, smoothly bumpy, a big sun-warmed body of water, and there was nothing to do worthy of a day like this.She had seen all the operas. The best female impersonators did not come on till late. Nobody listened to the comedian waving his black fan with a patter of tributes to the birthday lady. She milled around with several other girls. A mound of potted peonies from Loyang, said to be watered with milk, was wired with colored electric bulbs leaving enough space inside for a table set for dinner. Today's magician was supposed to be good, a Japanese woman who had just played Shanghai. They talked about the programme in the Young Marshal's study. He had glanced at her curiously, then scarcely looked at her again.It was the hair-do. She steamed under the hot cloud of crimpy hair. She had not seen him for months. He no longer wanted to tease her now that she was older. The other girls, no Chus among them, did not have much to say either. He gave them knick-knacks some people brought him from Hangchow.

"Let's go. Time the magician is on," a girl said.

She was going with them when he said, "Here's a fan for you."

She opened the sandalwood fan and looked at it.

"A big young lady now. Won't speak to people any more."

"What?"

"So stylish too. Getting engaged."

"What nonsense is this?" She colored automatically. This was one thing he had never teased her about. Old ladies liked to do it.

"You won't tell. Won't invite me to the wedding either?"

"Stop that nonsense." It no longer sounded like a joke. The disaster suddenly lifted her up and put her among the adults.

"So? I'll be waiting for the feast."

"Pei!" she pretended to spit and turned to go. "What's the matter with you today?"

"All right. Sorry for being a busybody."

"Where did this talk come from?"

"Haven't you heard really?" For the first time she saw a gleam of anxiety in his eyes.

"There's no such thing."

"The Tangs are making a match for you."

"No such thing. I'll say no anyway."

He laughed. "What's the use of your saying no?"

"Kill me and I'll still say no." Here it came, the opportunity to die for him and to let him know.

"How about telling them the Fifth Old Concubine has adopted you, so she will see to your marriage."

"I'm never going to marry."

"Why?"

"Don't want to."

"What do you want to do if you're going to be an old young lady all your life? Go to college? Go abroad? Go as my secretary, all right? What are you looking at?" He crowded close to see what she found so engrossing in the fan.

"I'm counting."

"Counting what?"

"The beauties."

He pointed to each painted figure in the garden and pavilions as he counted them. "Ten."

"Eleven."

"Ought to be twelve. It's usually twelve."

"I missed this one in the window. That's twelve."

"I got her. And here's one behind the tree."

"One, two, three, four…" She got ten.

Their nearness so confused them it came out different every time. Finally with an embarrassed little laugh he pounced on her, "Still another one here."

"Let me finish."

"What about this one here? So small we didn't see."

He did not let go of her wrist and held it up for examination. "Why so thin? You weren't like this before."

Immediately ashamed of not having turned out as pretty as she had promised to be, she mumbled, "It's only lately."

"Aren't you well?"

"Yes. I just can't eat."

"Why?"

She did not answer.

"Why?"

The more she kept her head down, the heavier it weighed,impossible to lift.

"Not because of me?"

He pushed up her bangs to see the hidden half of her face.She held still, nude and windblown. His arms were so loose around her it felt like a coat of powder. She struggled foggily.He must know too that it was no use. The difference in their age had him married long ago. They might as well have lived in different dynasties. She was free to love him as if she found him in a book. Otherwise how would she have been so shameless?Suddenly mortified, she did not know how to explain if he did not know. And how would he guess? Run and it would just seem like acting shy. She ran and heard the fan crunch underfoot.

Once out of the room she soon stopped running for fear of being seen. He was not following her. She was immensely relieved and happy. He loved her. Let them make their matches,it no longer matter what happened to her. He loved her, he always would. Surprisingly it was still afternoon. The clang of gongs came over faintly from the stage. She was so lonely she had to touch every pillar and post on the corridor walk. After taking another turn, definitely out of his sight, she skipped just to feel the familiar patter of pigtails on her shoulders, somehow as dim and far away as the sound of the gongs.





