6



"Things are in great disorder outside," Aunt Hung confided. "Your father went and got up a local security council,same as when the dynasty fell. But what a change of position.The Old Marshal was just one of his officers then. This time he must have given permission or your father wouldn't have gone ahead with it."

Fourth Miss knew what was coming.

"Their eldest is a good boy, considering. He stood pampering well. Although his wife is no match for him, for all the talk about the Third Chu he never did take her into the house. That's something."

Fourth Miss did not flinch at this about the Third Chu. She went on playing with the brass-ring puzzle.

"Actually in a family like theirs, what if there are two wives both just as great? The Old Marshal may not allow it for such a young man, but it may also have to do with the Chus'reputation. If it's a different kind of girl now, from a different sort of family. A girl's reputation is most important. People talk all over town before there is anything to speak of. Take your father, especially now that he's active again. Even if everybody knows of his connection with the Chans he wants at least to seem independent. What if people say he'd do anything to please the Chans? You know your father's temper. Even the Old Marshal won't interfere——after all a man punishing his own children. Not to say me, I'd be held guilty myself. I needn't go into all this, it must have occurred to you."

She herself was ready to die for it but what about Aunt Hung and her amah? They were her hell. Only she was not obsessed with hell. For the moment she was not expected to say anything as long as she bowed her head. Aunt Hung was being extraordinarily mild about it. Even then she could not help hardening and shrinking at the desecration of the thing between him and her merely by mentioning it. Just for other eyes to look on it was to misunderstand.

Aunt Hung said no more. The most important thing at the moment was to stop him from paying them another visit. He did not come again.

It was a point of honor with Fourth Miss not to ask him about the future. Just because he did not mention it did not mean he had forgotten. If he had tried speaking to his father and met with humiliations he would not want to tell her. He had never told her that he knelt for a whole day asking his father's forgiveness after the Manchurian rebellion. She heard this at a relatives' house.

She was never worried the minute she saw him. Everything was as clear as smiling into a mirror. Only when he had gone to war and she had not seen him for months her position began to weigh on her. She wanted to go to his house and see the Fifth Old Concubine and his children, even his wife. They were her only kin. At home she lived among strangers. The Fifth Old Concubine often spoke of him as a child:

"He used to wait by a pond in the courtyard for people in new clothes who seemed well-pleased with themselves. He'd throw a big stone into the water splashing all over them and clap his hands and laugh. People were too embarrassed to say anything except ‘Did the Young Marshal get a fright?' Hey-ya, the naughtiness, and when he got older, the worries and jitters I had, from having to account for him before his father," she said proudly with her puffy eyelids down.

She owed her position largely to him. She had been a small town prostitute once. If he got killed in the war Fourth Miss saw herself go up to her and kneel down crying hugging her knees begging to be taken in. "Alive I am a person in his house;dead I shall be a ghost in his house" was the set piece on such occasions. The maiden went to her lover's funeral dressed in mourning:

"White silk blouse, white silk skirt,

White silk kerchief on black hair girt."

It would be a case of wong mung gua, widowed by looking at the door, when a girl who had lost her fiancé wished to be his widow. What was one more extra woman in that huge house already full of rickety relationships, an old concubine he treated as his mother, an oldish woman he treated as his wife. They wouldn't refuse her? She was too young to know her own mind and would ruin their good name by remarrying eventually. The usual reason. She would be forcibly escorted back to her own house where her father would kill her from shame.

He telephoned just before the Lunar New Year. "It's me. I'm back."

At the sound of his voice she seemed suddenly to lean back against solid wall although she had not moved from where she stood telephone in hand. The car was coming for her.

"Back?" Aunt Hung said.

"Yes."

The trouble Aunt Hung had had in getting a telephone of her own, the suspicions it aroused were justified now that a tryst had been arranged over it. She had a guilty pang at Aunt Hung's silence. As for the amah, the woman stole around nowadays as if pregnant by a ghost, expecting to give birth to some monster any day now.

He had won the battle of the South Pass after a long siege.He got dysentery at the front. Opium was recommended as a quick cure so he got the habit.

"I'll have a doctor end it as soon as I'm rested."

He would not let her see him lie down and smoke,wrapping his lips around the thick mouthpiece to make a slightly tilted snout. It was the vice of his father's generation like singsong girls. Both smelled of old men's spit.

"Did you miss me?" With an arm around her he strained to see her averted face. The question was sexual somehow. "Did you miss me?"

She finally gave a half-hearted stiff-necked nod.

"Do you smell it on my breath?"

"No." It was just a faint odor you associate with old people.She thought of opium as a handicap of the elderly. Still it was fortunate this was all he got from the war.

"The Third Chu is going to be married."

"Really? To whom?"

He muttered a name.

"What does he do?"

"Politician. She could have done better."

They spoke of other things. She suddenly smiled widely at him and burst out with, "I'm so glad."

"I knew you were dying to say that." He half laughed irritably and seemed to resent the comforting arms she put around him.

The next day he telephoned after eight in the evening. "It's me. I want to see you once more this year."

It immediately seemed to her also that it would be a year's separation otherwise. "Too late today."

"Tomorrow is New Year's Eve."

"No, that won't do."

"Say it's a show. The car comes right now."

"All right."

"I'm to go to the show with them," she mumbled to Aunt Hung.

"Tch! With the New Year upon us every family has business of its own. Nobody goes gallivanting around. Your father will speak," she whispered and it sounded frightening, his speaking at all.

After a silence Aunt Hung turned to the amah murmuring,talking fast, "Go up front and say the Marshal's House is taking Fourth Miss to a show."

The amah went.

"Well, hurry up and get ready, in case nothing is said. You can't go out like this."

They really went to see a movie. This started him taking her to shows and dinners where there was dancing. Either he was growing reckless or wanted to force the issue. His doctor always went along to give him injections for the opium cure. She had her hair done up to look as if it was cut, and wore new gowns and high heels kept at their secret house. Everybody was talking about them but she did not mind, not like with Aunt Hung.This was just the crowd's murmur, part of the lights and music. She did not get to hear what the Old Marshal said:

"Who can't he have for a concubine, it has to be my old friend's daughter. What kind of man does that make me?Marriage is out of the question even if he's free. We Chans don't have daughters-in-law that are laid first and married later."

Her father made his first move.

"I spoke to the principal of Peking University," he summoned her to say. "He will let you in as a listening student.You can try to catch up in a year or two."

No reason was given why she alone of the brothers and sisters was to go to school. The assumption was times were changing, college girls were sometimes preferred in marriage.In effect it set her free with the entire school day at her own disposal. If she went to the bad the blame was on modern education, the usual whipping boy. Better let her run wild than have it said that her father gave her away as concubine to the Chans. It eased the unspoken strain between the two houses.If the affair came to nothing she might still marry. Didn't the Third Chu?

Aunt Hung was oddly triumphant, the first time Fourth Miss had ever seen her excited. All these years of neglect and slights were avenged. The man was afraid. Her child had backing that had him cowed. Fourth Miss was her daughter as never before. She allowed herself to worry aloud:

"The times are unsettled. Better make your plans, don't put it off too long. Of course the Old Marshal is in a difficult position because of his feeling for the Tangs. But you don't want to fight over an empty name. Out of regards for your father he can't treat you wrong. The thing is for the Young Marshal to find the right person to speak to his father, someone who could get a word in. It's up to you to make up your mind. Men are never in a hurry," she whispered smiling, leery of calling attention to her knowledge of men as a singsong girl, careful not to hint that he might be as fickle as others. "I'm just reminding you as a bystander. I can see you don't lack decision. People will blame me for not speaking up earlier. For one thing it would be no use. It will just spoil things after being mother and daughter together."

Fourth Miss remained silent. By now it was rude and hurting never to have told her anything. But how was she to tell her that they never spoke of such things?

"So the Third Chu is married. Even got her husband a post. That's modern times for you."

Aunt Hung seemed particularly impressed by her keeping quiet about the Third Miss Chu's marriage. It made her slightly uneasy to have come to be loved for her supposed hardness.

Moon Festival was celebrated as usual in Peking despite the war with Canton, now split into Nanking and Hankow on their way north. He had been away for a long time on the Honan front. Still it was the happiest Moon Festival in her life. She had a schoolmate over, a girl alone in Peking, and walked her back to the dormitory. The family ricksha followed a few paces behind so they could ride any time they got tired. The low grey houses made the streets look still wider. Firecrackers pit-patted faraway with now and then a surprise banging away hollowly close by. All the shops were boarded up, everybody home by now for the reunion feast. The long street led straight up to the slate blue sky with the moon like a wheel of ice. The wind blew her veil into her mouth every time she spoke. She wore the dark red knitted shawl that no college girl was without and swung the box of moon cakes that her friend was to take home with her. They walked on the tram tracks until a tram bore down on them as big as a house clacking its bell that sounded like "I got the best man, the best, the best, the best." It was exactly what she had wanted when she stood right in front of the stage as a child with both hands on the boards and could never get up close enough. Now the cymbals were clapping down on top of her head.

He telephoned the next day. It turned out that he had come back the day before.

"Spent Moon Festival with his wife," Aunt Hung sniggered,indignant.

She just smiled. She herself had had to eat reunion feast with the family.

"Where's Dr. Liang?" she looked around the room when he made her sit down beside him.

"That turtle egg, I threw him out."

"What happened?" She had never seen him so angry.

"Those injections he gave me was a kind of morphine."

"Stop opium with morphine?"

"It's on purpose. To get me into the habit."

"Why, who is he?"

"He turns out to be Yang Yi-peng's man."

She searched her glossary of faceless names. Would that be the Old Marshal's most trusted aide?

"Why?"

"He hates me. It's all out in the open after the Koo Singling incident."

The uprising in Manchuria. He didn't mean he was in it after all?

"That was to get him mainly."

Only partly against his father? The enormity of it instantly put her at sea. What happened to crown princes who rose against their father? Imprisonment, an imperial gift of poisoned wine for which you kowtowed in thanks toward the direction of the palace. Whatever he did it showed he was a man, not just So-and-so's son. Maybe she was also a little sad because he had done what he wouldn't do for her sake.

"But they say that you——" She stopped.

"That I lost my head gambling and whoring, didn't know what was going on in my own battalion?"

"Just that you were careless."

"I'm not such a fool. I played cards with Koo at the battalion club, yes. He's one of our better young officers. We both wanted change, but no chance of that as long as Yang was around. In the end there was no other way. It would have succeeded too but for the Japanese intervention."

"Why are they for the Old Marshal?"

"They don't want the Russians in Manchuria. Koo was allied with the Christian General and he's with the Russians."

She could not imagine him on the Christian General's side against his father. Since then he had defeated the General at South Pass. This year the two had been fighting again in Honan with the General on the side of the south.

Her silence made him add in his father's defence, "Some say the Old Marshal is pro-Japanese. Of course he has to get along with them because Manchuria is right next to Korea. But he always took this attitude: the small things could be talked over, the big things he would put off. Nowadays even the small things he will put off, the big things are definitely not negotiable.He never even carried out their terms for squashing Koo Singling."

"What happened to Koo?"

"He was shot."

For a moment neither of them spoke. He had been spared because he was the son.

"Can't you tell the Old Marshal about being tricked? About the injections."

A slight shake of his head with a half blink dismissed the idea completely. But meanwhile other people would be telling the Old Marshal about his turning into an addict at his age.

"A funny thing the other day, shows the kind of people we have around. Word came that the southern troops violated the first president's grave, so somebody suggested that we desecrate Sun Yatsun's body in return."

"Sun Yatsun is buried here?"

"In West Hill. Luckily Yieh Loh-fu was around that day,an old Nationalist. He persuaded the Old Marshal that these things were not done nowadays and anyway to check first. It turned out to be not the Nationalists but the Christian General's garrisons. Trees were chopped down, buildings robbed but the grave was untouched. So Yieh said to the Old Marshal, since Sun's remains happen to be in Peking we should protect it just to show we are big-hearted. So the Old Marshal ordered a detail of soldiers to the Temple of Green Clouds. Sure enough, in a couple of days several men went to the temple with picks and hoes. When they saw the sentries they loitered and left."

"Who were they?"

"Chi Yung-fu's men."

She gathered that they were from the first president's old troops.

"We're not so far behind. Why, the Nationalists themselves, two years ago when their rightists lost power to the left they came all the way here from Canton, into enemy territory as it was, just to hold a meeting in front of their leader's grave, and was known henceforth as the West Hill Conference Clique. Madame Sun herself——it was her idea to embalm him to last forever."

"He looks alive?" she cried.

"Yes, she got the idea from Lenin, she's pro-Communist.Of course she put it on her husband, said he had said it would be best if the body could be preserved. His followers were rather taken aback. For one thing the costs. In the end Russia gave them the glass coffin as a gift."

"Is she beautiful?"

"Big eyes."

"Which is more beautiful, she or her younger sister?"

"The younger is more lively. Madame Sun is lively too except that her husband took sick right away when they were here. I represented the Old Marshal to welcome him off the ship in Tientsin. It snowed the day we got to Peking. As we drove from the station there was a huge crowd besides the welcoming groups. People on top of all the roofs and trees with the big snow coming down." He confronted her almost indignantly. "The crowd was just as big in Tientsin, only the police chief drove them away to please Premier Tuan."

"Was Sun Yatsun really such a great man?"

"The thing is he represents the idea of a republic. At the revolution most people didn't know what happened. By the thirteenth year of the republic they really got to want it. Like women, when they are first married they don't know what it's all about but later they come to want it. Will you?"

"I don't know. I'm not married." She was sorry the minute it was out of her mouth, as if to remind him.

"So you're not. Getting independent, eh? Say whose man you are."

"Stop it."

"Whose man are you? Say it."

"Stop it. Was Madame Sun's sister with them that time?"

"No, just the two of them. He'd been invited down to form a government. There were high hopes among his followers that he'd be president. He called on the Old Marshal as soon as he arrived. I was with them. After the greetings the Old Marshal stood up right away saying, ‘I Chan am a rough man, so I'd like to say frankly, it's my business to boost men. Today I may boost a man named Tuan. So can I boost a man named Sun. I only object to Communism. If we are to practise Communism I Chan would rather shed blood than go red.' This little speech when it got to Tuan's ears made him more suspicious than ever.Actually the talk only lasted half an hour. Sun of course denied he was pro-Communist. But there was Tuan, already installed.Sun went back to his hotel and conferred with his aides until after midnight. That same night he got ill."

"That's how he died!"

"A few months later. All this time Old Tuan wouldn't see him and never went to the funeral. The excuse was his legs were so swollen he could not get into his shoes. The head of a country and no shoes to wear!"

"At least he's gone away."

"He's having a good laugh on us. The government a vacuum after he stepped down. The regency cabinet with all our allies represented couldn't last of course. After the cabinet resigned nobody else would accept the posts. The Old Marshal was angry. ‘Then just get anyone,' he said. Government employees have not been paid for six months. Ex-emperor Pu Yi still gets thirty thousand a month, from us personally. This respect for all higher-ups is all that's left of our king and country.Anyway all the people ever ask for is ‘a Honan man to rule Honan' and ‘a Shantung man to rule Shantung.' If they must be misruled they'd rather have one of themselves do it. As far as possible we let them have it. Any local person with enough armed men to overrun the area, gets from us a title or a post."

It did not sound good. "Is the war going to get here?"

"There's no telling about wars. As far as strength goes we have no fears. Last year Fung's troops did exceptionally good trench work at South Pass. But our cannons were so fierce,after several days of concentrated firing even the earth crust was turned over. Canton belonged to the school of revolutionaries with home-made bombs. Now that they have Russian arms and advisors naturally our allies are no match for them. Like Wu Pan-hu, when news came that his front was collapsing he sent the Big Sword Corps to chop down deserters. His soldiers had heard the Big Swords were coming and took shots at them through the train windows. The swordsmen never dared get off the train."

"What's the use of these allies?"

"Yes, everybody for himself. Fang of the southeast just sat still watching Wu get hit when he could have easily cut off the southern supply lines. When he was defeated in turn he bribed Long Legs to give him safe conduct to Mukden so he could come beg for help in person, traveling incognito in civilian clothes because he was a disgrace to the uniform. Seeing how he humbled himself the Old Marshal sent Long Legs to help him get back his five provinces." She had heard of their General Long Legs. "The Old Marshal is like that. As long as a man is your equal, even if he has been an enemy, always be generous and save him some face. The worst offence is to move against your superior. That's how Long Legs ganged with Fang managed to flatter the Old Marshal into heading the government himself.Subordinates don't count, but the support of your peers…"

"Has he become President?" she faltered.

"No, not President or Premier, just Grand Marshal. The Old Marshal is modest that way. All his life he has preferred to stay in the wings. This is already unlike him."

He stopped abruptly. She had also heard the saying,"Change and die." It was a bad sign when older people change their ways.

"The south is a mess too," she said.

"They have their kit of tools."

"They're Communists?"

"Not any more. Nanking has hitched a thread on England and America and thrown over Russia. Now Russia is looking to us to stop the south. The Old Marshal doesn't care, he had the Soviet Embassy searched anyway and published all the secret documents, proofs of their subversions. They're pushing hard here. It did look as though they had China going Communist."

"In the south?"

"Everywhere the southern troops went. Mass trials of landlords. Dividing up the land. Cutting men's gowns short, the long gown is upper class. Also attacking churches and missions like the Boxers all over again. Foreigners do get themselves hated because the government kowtows to them and takes their part, then as now. A missionary is a power in the countryside.It's always popular to be against foreigners, and Communism sneaks in under cover. The people have their grievances and will have it out any way you let them. But the Communists are being purged, they lasted no longer than the Boxers."

"Is Madame Sun's sister married now?"

He smiled. "I don't know, haven't heard."

"How old is she?"

"About my age."

"She's not twenty-seven already?"

"I don't know, she herself didn't say. Foreignized women don't tell their age."

"She can't be not marrying ever?"

"There's no telling about those Christians."

"It's not because of you?"

"No, no."

"She must have liked you."

"She was looking for a ruler of China and I stood a chance of inheriting the position."

"You make her sound so hard."

"It's only natural that she should want to emulate her sister."

"Is she very beautiful?"

"No."

"No, tell the truth."

"There is a wonderful freshness that comes with going to school abroad. And she didn't come back all masculine and insufferable."

"Lucky the Old Marshal wouldn't let you get a divorce."

"It never came to that."

"Didn't you want to marry her?"

"If I did it had to do with the whole picture. A man may also want to marry into a certain house, like a lighted doorway everybody turns to——something you don't happen to have. After that crowd to see Sun Yatsun in the snow, any relations I can have with a man like that I won't mind having."

"But you have to like the girl."

"That of course. I used to get those ideas, not like now, no more stray thoughts."

"Did the Old Marshal know?"

"He took it as a joke. His son marrying the daughter of a fife-and-drummer! That's what they call her father. He used to play a harmonium doing missionary work near Shanghai."

The famous debutante was now a cozy figure in her own past. "I wonder why she never married."

"It may be difficult for her too. At her age, even a couple of years back all the men she met would be married."

He pulled the bell rope. The new doctor was fetched from another courtyard to give him the same injection as the other doctor had been giving him.

He was still pent up. "Let's go to West Hill."

"So late. The city gate will be closed."

"It will open for us."

It was growing dark as they got into the car with the doctor.They could hear from afar the gong at the city gate working itself up to a long frantic tzong-tzong-tzong-tzong-tzong-tzong,sounding an enemy attack or fire or flood, the end of the world.The car got round the mule carts that had just managed to squeeze in. One of the guards jumped off the running board and ran ahead shouting. The gates swung open again and they drove through the tunnel in the iron-grey wall standing on black dust.

The long ride really seemed to get them away. But at West Hill Hotel they did not go into the dining room in case there was somebody they knew. They stood around the goldfish pond while Dr. Li went in to order soft drinks. She was wearing black glasses and a veil.

"You look like a war lord's concubine meeting a female impersonator in secret," he said.

It was not so romantic though. They ate dinner in their suite upstairs with the doctor. They spoke of places to see in the morning before going back, so it was settled that they would stay the night. She could say she was at a schoolmate's house but she wondered if she was going too far.

It was unnaturally silent in the country and the westernstyle hotel was dead quiet. Peking seemed a long way off with its vigilant drum and bell and city murmurs. Staying out all night,and in a hotel, she was so far out of bounds that she was no longer under the protection of the law. She felt ridiculously like a captive bride brought to a new village, finally under his power. Oddly enough he also looked embarrassed taking off his clothes not looking at her, smiling slightly, his eyes very bright. To escape the feeling of strangeness she quickly went to bed and under cover and slipped into his arms as soon as he got in. But he turned back the blanket and took his time sorting her out in the lamplight.

"What are you doing?"

An animal was feeding on her. She saw his bent head enlarged by perspective between her reared thighs and felt his hair brushing against her with a frenzy of terror. The flicks of his kisses furled petal-like in and around the bud of her inner self,intolerably. The resignation of the fallen prey alternated in her with some unformed yearning to get away somehow or devour in turn, be packed full of him. She tried to get up several times.At last it was him again smiling down at her, a little flushed. She took him almost gasping with relief, catching sips of a half glass of wine rocking on board ship. He filled her slowly with deep plunges and suddenly swung sideways like a fish swishing its tail,watching her face half laughing. He stopped to look and fondle.

"Bigger, aren't they? Haven't they grown?"

But they hardly talked all night, for a change.





