Breaking Dawn




BOOK ONE: BELLA (1-7)

Childhood is not from birth to a certain age and at a certain age

The child is grown, and puts away childish things.

Childhood is the kingdom where nobody dies.

Edna St. Vincent Millay

PREFACE

I’d had more than my fair share of near-death experiences; it wasn’t something you ever really got used to.

It seemed oddly inevitable, though, facing death again. Like I really was marked for disaster. I’d escaped time and time again, but it kept coming back for me.

Still, this time was so different from the others.

You could run from someone you feared, you could try to fight someone you hated. All my reactions were geared toward those kinds of killers—the monsters, the enemies.

When you loved the one who was killing you, it left you no options. How could you run, how could you fight, when doing so would hurt that beloved one? If your life was all you had to give your beloved, how could you not give it?

If it was someone you truly loved?


BOOK TWO: JACOB (8-18)

And yet, to say the truth,

reason and love keep little company together nowadays.

William Shakespeare

A Midsummer Night’s Dream

Act III, Scene i

PREFACE

Life sucks, and then you die.

Yeah, I should be so lucky.



BOOK THREE: BELLA (19-39)

Personal affection is a luxury you can have only after all your enemies are eliminated. Until then, everyone you love is a hostage, sapping your courage and corrupting your judgment.

Orson Scott Card

Empire

PREFACE

No longer just a nightmare, the line of black advanced on us through the icy mist stirred up by their feet.

We’re going to die, I thought in panic. I was desperate for the precious one I guarded, but even to think of that was a lapse in attention I could not afford.

They ghosted closer, their dark robes billowing slightly with the movement. I saw their hands curl into bone-colored claws. They drifted apart, angling to come at us from all sides. We were outnumbered. It was over.

And then, like a burst of light from a flash, the whole scene was different. Yet nothing changed—the Volturi still stalked toward us, poised to kill. All that really changed was how the picture looked to me. Suddenly, I was hungry for it. I wanted them to charge. The panic changed to bloodlust as I crouched forward, a smile on my face, and a growl ripped through my bared teeth.





Copyright © 2008 by Stephenie Meyer

All rights reserved. Except as permitted under the U.S. Copyright Act of 1976, no part of this publication may be reproduced, distributed, or transmitted in any form or by any means, or stored in a database or retrieval system, without the prior written permission of the publisher.

Little, Brown and Company

Hachette Book Group USA

237 Park Avenue, New York, NY 10017

Visit our Web site at www.lb-teens.com

First eBook Edition: August 2008

Little, Brown and Company is a division of Hachette Book Group USA, Inc.

The Little, Brown name and logo are trademarks of Hachette Book Group USA, Inc.

Epigraph for Book Three from Empire by Orson Scott Card. A Tor Book. Published by Tom Doherty Associates, LLC. Copyright © 2006 by Orson Scott Card. Reprinted with permission of the author.

The characters and events portrayed in this book are fictitious. Any similarity to real persons, living or dead, is coincidental and not intended by the author.

ISBN: 978-0-316-03283-4

BOOK TWO: JACOB

Preface

Waiting For The Damn Fight To Start Already

Sure As Hell Didn’t See That One Coming

Why Didn’t I Just Walk Away? Oh Right, Because I’m An Idiot.

The Two Things At The Very Top Of My Things-I-Never-Want-To-Do List

Some People Just Don’t Grasp The Concept Of “Unwelcome”

Good Thing I’ve Got A Strong Stomach

You Know Things Are Bad When You Feel Guilty For Being Rude To Vampires

Tick Tock Tick Tock Tick Tock

Too-Much-Information Alert

What Do I Look Like? The Wizard Of Oz? You Need A Brain? You Need A Heart? Go Ahead. Take Mine. Take Everything I Have.

There Are No Words For This.

This book is dedicated to my ninja/agent, Jodi Reamer.

Thank you for keeping me off the ledge.

And thanks also to my favorite band,

the very aptly named Muse,

for providing a saga’s worth of inspiration.


