8. About the Authors


Ludwig von Mises (1881-1973), leading proponent of the Austrian School in the 20th century, received his doctorate from the University of Vienna, where he taught. He was also economic advisor to the Austrian Chamber of Commerce. Mises later taught at the Graduate Institute for International Studies in Geneva and New York University. His most important works include The Theory of Money and Credit, Socialism, Theory and History, and Human Anion.


Gottfried Haberler (1900-1995) received his doctorate from the University of Vienna, and taught there as well as at Harvard University. A student of Mises’s, he was also resident scholar at the American Enterprise Institute and a distinguished scholar of the Ludwig von Mises Institute. His most important works include The Sense of Index Numbers, Theory of International Trade, Prosperity and Depression, and Economic Growth and Stability.

Murray N. Rothbard (1926-1995) received his doctorate from Columbia University. He also studied with Mises at New York University. He taught at New York Polytechnic Institute and the University of Nevada, Las Vegas, where he held the S.J. Hall Chair. He was also academic vice president of the Ludwig von Mises Institute from its founding. His most important works include Man, Economy, and State, Power and Market, America’s Great Depression, and The History of Economic Thought.

Friedrich A. Hayek (1899-1992) received his doctorate from the University of Vienna, and taught there as well as at the London School of Economics, the University of Chicago, and the University of Freiburg. A student of Mises’s and the recipient of the Nobel Prize in Economics for his work with Mises, Hayek was a distinguished scholar of the Ludwig von Mises Institute. His most important works include Prices and Production, Monetary Theory and the Trade Cycle, Monetary Nationalism and International Stability, and The Pure Theory of Capital.

* * * * *

Roger W. Garrison received his doctorate from the University of Virginia and is Professor of Economics at Auburn University. He lectures for the Ludwig von Mises Institute and directs its Austrian Economics Workshop. He is also the author of many important articles on macroeconomics, and is considered a leading business-cycle theorist in the Austrian School.





The Ludwig von Mises Institute

The Mises Institute, established in 1982, advances the Austrian School of economics, free markets, sound money, and private property on campus and in American life.




Ludwig von Mises


Supported by private donations, the Institute publishes an academic journal, books, monographs, study guides, occasional papers, a quarterly book review, and a monthly, The Free Market.

The Institute provides fellowships to Austrian School graduate students and sponsors a wide range of teaching and research programs. The Mises Institute also holds conferences on such topics as war, bureaucracy, central banking, and the gold standard.

Contributions are tax-deductible and are welcomed from individuals, families, businesses, and foundations.





