Foreword to the 1944 American Edition by John Chamberlain




The shibboleths of our times are expressed in a variety of terms：“full employment,” “planning,” “social security,” “freedom from want.” The facts of our times suggest that none of these things can be had when they are made conscious objects of government policy. They are the fool’s-gold words. In Italy they debauched a people and led to death under the burning African suns. In Russia there was the first Five-Year Plan; there was also the liquidation of the three million kulaks. In Germany there was full employment between 1935 and 1939; but six hundred thousand Jews are now deprived of their property, scattered to the ends of the earth, or lying in mass graves in the Polish forests. And in America the pump never quite filled up after the successive primings; war alone saved the politicians of “full employment.”



To date, only a handful of writers has dared to trace a connection between our shibboleths and the terror that haunts the modern world. Among these writers is F. A. Hayek, an Austrian economist now living in England. Having watched the congealing of the German, the Italian, and the Danubian social and economic systems, Hayek is horrified to see the English succumbing by degrees to the controlled-economy ideas of the German Walter Rathenau, the Italian syndicalists—yes, and Adolf Hitler, who had the courage to draw conclusions from the less forthright statism of his predecessors.¹¹ This book of Hayek’s—The Road to Serfdom—is a warning, a cry in a time of hesitation. It says to the British and by implication to Americans：Stop, look and listen.



The Road to Serfdom is sober, logical, severe. It does not make for ingratiating reading. But the logic is incontestable：“full employment,” “social security,” and “freedom from want” cannot be had unless they come as by-products of a system that releases the free energies of individuals. When “society” and the “good of the whole” and “the greatest good of the greatest number” are made the overmastering touchstones of state action, no individual can plan his own existence. For the state “planners” must arrogate to themselves the right to move in on any sector of the economic system if the good of “society” or the “general welfare” is paramount. If the rights of the individual get in the way, the rights of the individual must go.



The threat of state “dynamism” results in a vast, usually unconscious fear among all producing interests that still retain a conditional freedom of action. And the fear affects the springs of action. Men must try to outguess the government as yesterday they tried to outguess the market. But there is this difference; the market factors obeyed at least relatively objective laws, while governments are subject to a good deal of whim. One can stake one’s future on a judgment that reckons with inventories, market saturation points, the interest rate, the trend curves of buyers’ desires. But how can an individual outguess a government whose aim is to suspend the objective laws of the market whenever and wherever it wishes to do so in the name of “planning”? Shrewdly, Peter Drucker once remarked that the “planners” are all improvisers.¹² They create not certainty but uncertainty—for individuals. And, as Hayek demonstrates, the end result of this uncertainty is civil war, or the dictatorship that averts civil war.



The alternative to “planning” is the “rule of law.” Hayek is no devotee of laissez faire; he believes in a design for an enterprise system. Design is compatible with minimum-wage standards, health standards, a minimum amount of compulsory social insurance. It is even compatible with certain types of government investment. But the point is that the individual must know, in advance, just how the rules are going to work. He cannot plan his own business, his own future, even his own family affairs, if the “dynamism” of a central planning authority hangs over his head.



In some respects Hayek is more “English” than the modern English. He belongs, with modifications, to the great Manchester line, not to the school of the Webbs.¹³ It may be that he is also more “American” than the modern Americans. If so, one can only wish for the widest possible United States audience for The Road to Serfdom.



John Chamberlain

New York, NY

July 1944　





