Reader’s Report by Jacob Marschak (1943)



December 20, 1943　



The current discussion between advocates and adversaries of free enterprise has not been conducted so far on a very high level. Hayek’s book may start in this country a more scholarly kind of debate.



The book will appeal to friends of free enterprise and give them new material：Hayek’s interpretation of the modern English scene (labor and industrial monopolist driving jointly toward a collective economy) will be new to all American readers except those who have read or listened to William Benton’s impressions; while Hayek’s German background enables him to give new support to the contention that socialism is the father of Nazism.



Those who are not convinced in advance of Hayek’s thesis will probably learn from his argument even more than those who are. Hayek (Chapter IV) has a wholesome contempt for the quasi-scientific method of “trends,” “waves of tomorrow.” Those who love planning because they love the inevitable will, perhaps, after reading Hayek revise either their faith or their tastes. Perhaps they will start to think in terms of ends and means instead of in prophecies.



It is true that Hayek himself gives little food for such concrete thinking. As he says himself at the end of the book (pages 177, 179)⁹ the book is almost exclusively critical not constructive. Its technique is black-and-white. It is impatient of compromises (page 31). It is written with the passion and the burning clarity of a great doctrinaire. Hayek has the sincerity of one who has had the vision of a danger which the others have not seen. He warns his fellowmen with loving impatience.



Accordingly, the best chapters of the book are negative or formal. There is an excellent and truly inspiring chapter on the “Rule of Law” (Chapter VI); but Hayek has little to say as to how the Rule of Law (i.e., the avoidance of administrative decisions ad hoc) might be applied to create instruments for mitigating unemployment by monetary means, or for combating monopolists. On such points he gives only vague hints (page 90, 147). Since in this country the terms “plan” and “socialism” have often been used to include monetary and fiscal policies, social security, and even progressive income tax the American reader will possibly expect from Hayek a more concrete demarcation between what the book calls “planning in the good sense” and the (undesirable) planning proper. In fact, the non-economic chapters (that on “The End of Truth,” for example) are more impressive than the economic ones.



Those who read Walter Lippmann, Stuart Chase,¹⁰ or the Fortune’s discussions on the postwar world will also read Hayek. He is often less concrete than Lippmann or Chase; but his thinking is somewhat sharper, just because it is more abstract. Hayek’s style is readable and occasionally inspiring.



This book cannot be by-passed.



J. Marschak





