Letter from John Scoon to C. Hartley Grattan (1945)




Hayek：THE ROAD TO SERFDOM



May 2, 1945　

Mr. C. Hartley Grattan

⁶ White Hall Road

Tuckahoe, New York



Dear Mr. Grattan:



I have been in the office about five minutes a day since I returned to Chicago, or you certainly would have heard from me before this. The reviews were sent to you over a week ago, however, and for your purposes they tell the main story.



THE ROAD TO SERFDOM came to us in December 1943, was read by two scholarly readers outside of the Press, and was approved by our Publications Committee (made up of faculty members from various departments of the University) at the end of that month. It was in page proofs when we first saw it, and about to be published by Routledge in England. The idea of the Press’s publishing it in this country was suggested by a member of the Department of Economics at the University who had previously known Hayek and his work;¹⁵ almost simultaneously another friend of the author’s,¹⁶ once at the University but then in Washington with the government, suggested the book to us and got us the page proofs.



The first report, a copy of which I am enclosing marked “A,” was from a man who is very reliable, pretty middle-of-the-road in his political stand, and respected by both sides. He says in his report that he was on Hayek’s side in this matter even before reading the book, so he recommended that we get another report from the opposition. This we did, and the report labeled “B” came from one of the most definitely “progressive” economists in the country, whose name you would recognize immediately if it were not our long-standing policy never to reveal readers’ names. In other words, we simply could not have given the book a more objective trial：we didn’t know a thing about it at that time, so we got reports from two opposing points of view and then laid them before a committee composed of thirteen men of differing shades of opinion. They approved publication of the book by the Press.



That was all before Mr. Brandt and I came to the Press at the beginning of January, 1944. We found this project in the vault with many others, part of the probable program for the year just beginning then. As the Press started to make up its new list, THE ROAD TO SERFDOM looked far from world-shaking. Then we read the page proofs ourselves, and decided to ask the author to be specific about the book’s application to the United States, explicitly mentioning this country where he included it in his thought instead of slanting the book directly at an audience limited to England—“making no promises as to publication which might influence his judgment on this point,” my memo read. It went on to say：“If he agrees, let’s take it on. It will stir up trouble, but the author has a point and evidently has had excellent experience.” (I should explain here that the committee’s “approval” of a manuscript is not mandatory, so the question of publication had not yet been completely decided.)



This process was agreed upon by all parties, and we, a colleague of the author’s,¹⁷ and Mr. Hayek himself all set to work suggesting possible revisions. Specific changes were eventually agreed upon, Mr. Hayek of course having the final say about what was added, what was deleted, and the specific wording in each spot. Meanwhile we at the Press were worrying about a possible new title, the sort of sales the book would have (it was taken on purely as a scholarly work, and we knew it would either fall pretty flat or catch on very widely), and how best to introduce this work by a foreign author without much of a name in this country. After much conferring we decided to leave the title (a paraphrase of Bertrand Russell’s ROADS TO FREEDOM),¹⁸ to ask John Chamberlain to write an introduction to the book, and to have a first printing of 2,000 copies. This figure was definitely influenced by the competition the book faced in the previously published OMNIPOTENT GOVERNMENT, by Ludwig Von Mises, Hayek’s one-time teacher in Vienna.¹⁹



About the time the contract for American rights was signed—the beginning of April—we began to hear about the book in England, which had been published there on March 10. The first printing in England was only 2,000, but it was sold out in about a month. It began to be quoted in Parliament and in newspapers, and a few newspapers over here began mentioning it now and then—but of course we were still uncertain as to how it would appeal to the United States. As a matter of fact, right up until publication date we couldn’t get a bookstore even in New York excited about the book, although Joe Margolies, of Brentano’s, did allow it some sales possibilities.



Into June the author was correcting our proofs, and publication, which we had hoped for in July, was delayed until September 18, by which time the English edition was in its third printing. We sent out more advance copies and review copies than usual, and from the response we knew that the book would have a good chance of catching on：the first review that we saw was Orville Prescott’s in the NEW YORK TIMES of September 20, which was neutral and called it “this sad and angry little book,” but by the time we had seen Henry Hazlitt’s front page review in the Sunday TIMES BOOK REVIEW we had ordered a second printing of 5,000 copies. In a few days we had requests for German, Spanish, Dutch and other translation rights, and on September ²⁷ we ordered a third printing of 5,000 copies, upping it to 10,000 the next day. Requests for magazine rights came from several sources, but the READER’S DIGEST was first and made the best offer.



By the first week of October many stores were out of stock and we had a tremendous and intricate job of printing, binding, shipping and allotting to customers in both this country and Canada—by this time we had made an arrangement with Routledge to take care of Canadian orders too. From the start there was great enthusiasm for the book but the sales went by ups and downs and our advertising agency had a real headache getting space at the right times. A few book programs on the radio boosted the book, toward the end of October, but we knew that its sales would fall off after Christmas so we began casting about for something to do with it this year. Mr. Brandt got the idea of bringing Mr. Hayek over here; he called the departments of economics at several universities about the possibility, and all were very enthusiastic. As soon as definite arrangements had been made and it became known that Mr. Hayek was coming to this country, organizations and individuals of all sorts overwhelmed us with efforts to get hold of him and we had to turn the trip over to the National Concert and Artists Corporation.



The rest of the story you know. The book, now in its seventh printing, has sold nearly 50,000, but orders are coming in so fast that we don’t know the exact total. Actually it has had one of the most eccentric sales careers a book ever had, and it has been very difficult to know what to do next with it：the DIGEST condensation caused a great spurt, but the spurt did not hold—very likely because of the Book-of-the-Month Club’s distribution of the condensation, which has now reached a figure above 600,000.



Bitterness about the book has increased as time has gone by, rising to new heights as the book has made more of an impression. (People still tend to go off half-cocked about it; why don’t they read it and find out what Hayek actually says!) You also know how the author feels about this：one of his regrets is that in a way his conclusions are down on paper, but not the process by which he arrived at them, and we are all wondering whether some day we should not bring out a fully annotated edition of the book. (This edition is being used as collateral reading in political science and similar courses at a number of universities.) Meanwhile Hayek has many other projects on hand, none of which we should talk about now.



I hope that this will suffice for your needs—I have gathered the material out of the files and may have lost something in perspective. If there is anything more that you would like to know, we will try to supply it.



Yours sincerely,



John Scoon

Editor



JS:MB





