The Road to Serfdom：Text and Documents by F. A. Hayek





THE COLLECTED WORKS OF



F. A. Hayek

VOLUME II



THE ROAD TO SERFDOM



Text and Documents

The Definitive Edition





PLAN OF THE COLLECTED WORKS

Edited by Bruce Caldwell





Volume I The Fatal Conceit：The Errors of Socialism (1988)

Volume II The Road to Serfdom：Text and Documents

Volume III The Trend of Economic Thinking：Essays on Political Economists and Economic History (1991)

Volume IV The Fortunes of Liberalism and the Austrian School：Essays on Austrian Economics and the Ideal of Freedom (1992)

Volume V Good Money, Part I：The New World (1999)

Volume VI Good Money, Part II：The Standard (1999)

Volume VII Business Cycles, Part I

Volume VIII Business Cycles, Part

Volume IX Contra Keynes and Cambridge：Essays, Correspondence (1995)

Volume X Socialism and War：Essays, Documents, Reviews (1997)

Volume XI Capital and Interest

Volume XII The Pure Theory of Capital

Volume XIII Studies on the Abuse of Reason

Volume XIV The Sensory Order and Other Essays

Volume XV The Market and Other Orders

Volume XVI John Stuart Mill and Harriet Taylor

Volume XVII The Constitution of Liberty

Volume XVIII Essays on Liberty

Volume XIX Law, Legislation, and Liberty



Supplement Hayek on Hayek：An Autobiographical Dialogue (1994)

The plan is provisional. Minor alterations may occur in titles of individual books, and several additional volumes may be added.





THE COLLECTED WORKS OF

F. A. Hayek

VOLUME II



THE ROAD TO SERFDOM

Text and Documents

The Definitive Edition



EDITED BY

BRUCE CALDWELL





The University of Chicago Press





BRUCE CALDWELL is the Joe Rosenthal Excellence Professor in the Department of Economics at the University of North Carolina, Greensboro, and author of Beyond Positivism：Economic Methodology in the Twentieth Century and Hayek’s Challenge：An Intellectual Biography of F. A. Hayek, the latter also published by the University of Chicago Press. He is a past president of the History of Economics Society.



The University of Chicago Press

Routledge, London



© 2007 by the Estate of F. A. Hayek

Original text © 1944 by The University of Chicago

All rights reserved. Published 2007　

Printed in the United States of America



16 15 14 13 12 11 10 09 08 07 1 2 3 4 5



ISBN-13：978-0-226-32054-0 (cloth)

ISBN-13：978-0-226-32055-7 (paper)

ISBN-10：0-226-32054-5 (cloth)

ISBN-10：0-226-32055-3 (paper)



Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data



Hayek, Friedrich A. von (Friedrich August), 1899–1992.

The road to serfdom ：text and documents / F. A. Hayek ; edited by Bruce Caldwell. — Definitive ed.

p. cm. — (The collected works of F. A. Hayek ; v. 2)

Includes bibliographical references and index.

ISBN-13：978-0-226-32054-0 (cloth ：alk. paper)

ISBN-13：978-0-226-32055-7 (pbk. ：alk. paper)

ISBN-10：0-226-32054-5 (cloth ：alk. paper)

ISBN-10：0-226-32055-3 (pbk. ：alk. paper)

1. Economic policy. 2. Totalitarianism. I. Caldwell, Bruce. II. Title. III. Series：Hayek, Friedrich A. von (Friedrich August), 1899–1992. Works. 1989 ; v. 2.

HB171 .H426 1989 vol. 2

[HD82]

330.1 s—dc22

[338.9] 2006012835 



The paper used in this publication meets the minimum requirements of the American National Standard for Information Sciences—Permanence of Paper for Printed Library Materials, ANSI Z39.48-1992.





THE COLLECTED WORKS OF F. A. HAYEK



Founding Editor：W. W. Bartley III

General Editor：Bruce Caldwell



Published with the support of



The Hoover Institution on War, Revolution and Peace

Stanford University



The Earhart Foundation



The Pierre F. and Enid Goodrich Foundation



The Morris Foundation, Little Rock





CONTENTS



Editorial Foreword



Introduction





THE ROAD TO SERFDOM



Preface to the Original Editions



Foreword to the 1956 American Paperback Edition



Preface to the 1976 Edition



Introduction






EDITORIAL FOREWORD



The first volume in The Collected Works of F. A. Hayek was the last book that Hayek wrote, The Fatal Conceit. It was the first volume in two respects：it was volume 1 in the series, and it was the first published, in 1988. The founding general editor was the philosopher W. W. Bartley III, and he initially envisioned that the series would contain twenty-two volumes—at least, that was what was noted in the material describing the planned series in The Fatal Conceit. Wisely, Bartley added the proviso that “the plan is provisional.” It is now anticipated that there will be nineteen volumes in all, but the original proviso still applies.



Much has happened since 1988. A second volume produced under Bartley’s editorship was published in 1991, but it was a posthumous contribution, Bartley having succumbed to cancer in February 1990. Soon thereafter Stephen Kresge took over the position of general editor, and under him five more volumes were produced. The volumes in the series did not appear in numerical order：to date, volumes 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 9, and 10 have been published.



In spring 2002 Stephen Kresge asked me whether I might be interested in becoming the next general editor. I was, and after the Hayek family and representatives from the University of Chicago Press and Routledge all signed off, my work began. The first year or so was taken up with getting editorial material shifted from California to North Carolina, rethinking the ordering of the volumes, establishing relationships with existing and potential volume editors, and seeking funds to support the project.



The Road to Serfdom：Text and Documents—The Definitive Edition is the first volume to appear under the new general editorship. Others are on the way. I anticipate fairly steady progress over the next few years as the project moves toward completion.



In the first volume Bill Bartley briefly stated the editorial policy for the series as follows：“The texts of subsequent volumes will be published in corrected, revised and annotated form” and “essays which exist in slightly variant forms, or in several different languages, will be published always in English or in English translation, and only in their most complete and finished form unless some variation, or the timing thereof, is of theoretical or historical significance.” These policies will continue to be followed in the present volume and those to come.



For The Road to Serfdom the following editorial decisions were made. The British edition came out in March 1944, and the American in September of that year. The text for the American edition was reset, principally to replace phrases like “this country” with “England.” Because the American edition is accordingly clearer (that is, it does not presume that the reader knows that “this country” refers to England), it was chosen for the text. Accordingly, “American English” is used throughout—in this regard this volume differs from others in the series, in which “British English” has mainly been used. Typographical errors were silently corrected, except where Hayek provided an incorrect citation. In those cases the correction is made and noted. At many points in the book Hayek quotes others, and his quotations do not always exactly duplicate the original. However, only when his misquoting might affect the meaning of the passage is this noted; in any event, what Hayek originally wrote stands.



Each volume in The Collected Works is intended to be a definitive presentation of Hayek’s work. As such, when the University of Chicago Press proposed that we add the subtitle “The Definitive Edition” I initially resisted, thinking it in-appropriate to single out this volume from the rest. The Road to Serfdom is unique, however, in that it is the only piece of Hayek’s work to go through numerous editions：the original one in 1944, another in 1956 to which Hayek added a foreword, a 1976 edition to which he added a new preface, and the 1994 50th anniversary edition which carried an introduction by Milton Friedman. The subtitle was added, and I hope that this will always be considered the definitive edition. History suggests, however, that it may not be the last one.



Many have been involved in helping me get started as the new general editor. I owe a special debt to Mrs. Dorothy Morris of the Morris Foundation, Little Rock, who provided me with the “seed money” needed to initiate a search for additional funding for the project. As has been documented in forewords to preceding volumes in the series, Dorothy’s husband Walter Morris was instrumental in the creation of The Collected Works project, and the Morris Foundation has been constant in its support throughout the years. I first sought financial support for the project at the Mont Pèlerin meetings in London in October 2002, and John Blundell of the Institute of Economic Affairs provided me both advice on how to proceed and assistance in arranging for a fellowship to help defray the costs of attendance. The meeting ultimately led me to David Kennedy and Ingrid Gregg of the Earhart Foundation, and to Emilio Pacheco of the Liberty Fund and the Pierre F. and Enid Goodrich Foundation. These organizations have provided the lion’s share of support for the project. Finally, Stephen Kresge has been an advisor, mentor, sounding board, and friend throughout the very long transition from second to third general editor, and beyond. To all of them my most sincere thanks.



I also would like to thank the following people and organizations for granting their permission to reproduce materials and quote from letters：Mr. Frank B. Knight for permission to reproduce Frank Knight’s reader’s report on The Road to Serfdom; Dr. Thomas Marschak for permission to reproduce Jacob Marschak’s reader’s report on The Road to Serfdom; Mr. David Michaelis for permission to quote from Ordway Tead’s letter of September 25, 1943, to Fritz Machlup; and the Hoover Institution on War, Revolution, and Peace for permission to quote from materials contained in the Hoover Institution Archives.



Last but not least, I gratefully acknowledge the assistance of Emily Wilcox and Jason Schenker in preparing the manuscript.



Bruce Caldwell

Greensboro, NC





INTRODUCTION



The Road to Serfdom is F. A. Hayek’s most well-known book, but its origins were decidedly inauspicious. It began as a memo to the director of the London School of Economics, Sir William Beveridge, written by Hayek in the early 1930s and disputing the then-popular claim that fascism represented the dying gasp of a failed capitalist system. The memo grew into a magazine article, and parts of it were supposed to be incorporated into a much larger book, but during World War II he decided to bring it out separately. Though Hayek had no problem getting Routledge to publish the book in England, three American publishing houses rejected the manuscript before the University of Chicago Press finally accepted it.



The book was written for a British audience, so the director of the Press, Joseph Brandt, did not expect it to be a big seller in the States. Brandt hoped to get the well-known New York Herald Tribune journalist and author Walter Lippmann to write the foreword, noting in an internal memo that if he did, it might sell between two and three thousand copies. Otherwise, he estimated, it might sell nine hundred. Unfortunately, Lippmann was busy with his own work and so turned him down, as did the 1940 Republican presidential candidate Wendell Wilkie, whose 1943 book One World had been a best-seller.1 John Chamberlain, the book review editor for the New York Times, was ultimately recruited for the job.



One hopes for his sake that Brandt was not the sort who bet money on his hunches. Since its first publication in 1944, the University of Chicago Press estimates that more than 350,000 copies of The Road to Serfdom have been sold. Routledge added many thousands more, but we do not know how many exactly：that press was unable to come up with any reliable numbers. There is also no good count on the number of copies that appeared in translation, not least because a portion were samizdat copies produced and distributed behind the Iron Curtain during the cold war.2



Not everyone, of course, liked (or likes) the book. The intelligentsia, particularly in the United States, greeted its publication with condescension and, occasionally, vitriol. Then a diplomat in the British Embassy in Washington, Isaiah Berlin wrote to a friend in April 1945 that he was “still reading the awful Dr. Hayek.”3 The economist Gardiner Means did not have Berlin’s fortitude; after reading 50 pages he reported to William Benton of the Encyclopaedia Britannica that he “couldn’t stomach any more.”4 The philosopher Rudolf Carnap, writing to Hayek’s friend Karl Popper, apparently could not muster even the stamina of Means：“I was somewhat surprised to see your acknowledgement of von Hayek. I have not read his book myself; it is much read and discussed in this country, but praised mostly by the protagonists of free enterprise and unrestricted capitalism, while all leftists regard him as a reactionary.”5



Those who, like Carnap, have not read Hayek but think that they already know what he is all about should be prepared for some surprises. Those on the left might preview their reading with a peek at chapter 3, where Hayek expounds on some of the government intervention that he was prepared to accept, at least in 1944.6 Those on the right might want to have a look at his distinction between a liberal and a conservative in his 1956 foreword to the American paperback edition. Both will be surprised by what they find.



In this introduction I trace the origins of Hayek’s little book, summoning up the context in which it was produced and showing how it gradually came to its final form. The reactions, both positive and negative, that ultimately turned it into a cultural icon will then be documented. Because it is a controversial work, I will comment upon some of the most persistent criticisms that have been levied against it. Not all of these, I argue, are warranted：Hayek’s book may have been widely, but it was not always carefully, read. In my conclusion I will reflect briefly on its lasting messages.7



Prelude：The British, Naziism, and Socialism



Friedrich A. Hayek, a young economist from Vienna, came to the London School of Economics (LSE) in early 1931 to deliver four lectures on monetary theory, later published as the book Prices and Production.8 The topic was timely—Britain’s economy, stagnant through the 1920s, had only gotten worse with the onset of the depression—and the presentation was erudite, if at times hard to follow, owing to Hayek’s accent. On the basis of the lectures Hayek was offered a visiting professorship that began in the Michaelmas (fall) 1931 term, and a year later he was appointed to the Tooke Chair of Economic Science and Statistics. He would remain at the LSE until after the war.



The summer before Hayek arrived to teach was a traumatic one in Britain and across Europe. In addition to the deepening economic depression, financial crises on the continent led to a gold drain in Britain, and ultimately to the collapse of the Labour government, the abandoning of the gold standard, and, in autumn, the imposition of protectionist tariffs. Hayek’s entrance onto the London stage was itself accompanied by no little controversy. In August 1931 he caused a stir with the publication of the first half of a review of John Maynard Keynes’s new book, A Treatise on Money, which drew a heated reply from Keynes a few months later. His battle with Keynes and, later, with Keynes’s compatriot Piero Sraffa, would occupy no small amount of Hayek’s attention during the 1931–32 academic year.9



By the following year, however, Hayek had secured his chair, and for his inaugural lecture, delivered on March 1, 1933, he turned to a new subject.10 He began with the following question：Why were economists, whose advice was often so useful, increasingly regarded by the general public as out of step with the times during the perilous years that had followed the last war? To answer it Hayek drew upon intellectual history. He claimed that public opinion was unduly influenced by an earlier generation of economists who, by criticizing a theoretical approach to the social sciences, had undermined the credibility of economic reasoning in general. Once that had been accomplished, people felt free to propose all manner of utopian solutions to the problem of the depression, solutions that any serious study of economics would show were infeasible. Toward the end of his talk Hayek cited the new enthusiasm for socialist planning in Britain as an example of such misguided ideas. The economists who had paved the way for these errors were members of the German Historical School, advisors to Bismarck in the last decades of the nineteenth century.



Hayek’s choice of the German Historical School economists was significant on a number of levels. First, the German Historical School had before the war been the chief rival of the Austrian School of Economics, of which Hayek was a member.11 Next, though the German Historical School economists were conservative imperialists, cheerleaders for a strong German Reich and opponents of German social democracy, they also were the architects of numerous social welfare reforms. Bismarck embraced these reforms while at the same time repressing the socialists; indeed, the reforms were designed at least in part to undermine the socialist position and thereby strengthen the Empire. Hayek probably hoped that his audience would see certain parallels to the present day. Only a month before Adolf Hitler, who detested democracy and favored instead the reconstitution of another (third) Reich, had become Chancellor of the Weimar Republic. Within days he had convinced President Hindenburg to sign a decree prohibiting meetings and publications that could endanger public security, a measure aimed squarely at the communists and socialists. The morning before Hayek’s address the world had learned that the Reichstag building had been set on fire and burned; the Nazis were quick to blame the act on the communists and used it to justify further acts of repression. A half century before, Bismarck had used an attempt on the Emperor’s life to put his own anti-socialist laws in place.



After Hayek’s speech the situation in Germany continued to deteriorate. In March there were wholesale arrests of communists and harassment of the social democratic leadership. Opposition newspapers were closed, constitutional protections swept away, and a notorious “enabling law” passed that gave Hitler virtually dictatorial powers. On April 1 a nationwide boycott against German Jews was called, and later in the month action against the trade unions began. In May students on university campuses across Germany held book-burning celebrations, cleansing their libraries of suspect volumes. One such event was staged in the Berlin Opernplatz on May 10, 1933, and the martial songs and speeches of the participants were broadcast live across Germany. It was a horrific spring.



Hayek’s criticisms of socialism in his address were not well received. He would later recall that, following the talk, “one of the more intelligent students had the cheek to come to see me for the sole purpose of telling me that, though hitherto admired by the students, I had wholly destroyed my reputation by taking, in this lecture, a clearly anti-socialist position.”12 But even more disquieting for Hayek was the interpretation of events in Germany that was emerging among the British intelligentsia. Certain prominent members of the German industrial class had initially supported Hitler’s rise, and others had acquiesced in it. This, together with the Nazi party’s evident persecution of the left, led many in Britain to see Naziism as either a capitalist-inspired movement or, alternatively (if one were a Marxist, and believed that capitalism was doomed to collapse), as a last-ditch attempt by the bourgeoisie to deny the inexorable triumph of socialism. As Hayek recalled, his director at the LSE was one of the ones propagating such an interpretation:



A very special situation arose in England, already in 1939, that people were seriously believing that National Socialism was a capitalist reaction against socialism. It’s difficult to believe now, but the main exponent whom I came across was Lord Beveridge. He was actually convinced that these National Socialists and capitalists were reacting against socialism. So I wrote a memorandum for Beveridge on this subject, then turned it into a journal article. . . .13



In his reminiscence Hayek got the date wrong：given his reference in his memorandum to the Berlin student demonstration, and given that it carries the date “Spring 1933,” he probably wrote it in May or early June of that year. The memo, titled “Nazi-Socialism,” is reproduced for the first time in the appendix of this volume.14 In it, Hayek rebuts the standard account with the claim that National Socialism is a “genuine socialist movement.”15 In support of this interpretation he notes its antagonism to liberalism, its restrictive economic policy, the socialist background of some of its leaders, and its antirationalism. The success of the Nazis was not, he asserted, due to a reactionary desire on the part of the Germans to return to the prewar order, but rather represented a culmination of antiliberal tendencies that had grown since Bismarck’s time. In short, socialism and Naziism both grew out of the antiliberal soil that the German Historical School economists had tended. He added the chilling warning that many other countries were following, though at a distance, the same process of development. Finally, Hayek contended that “the inherent logic of collectivism makes it impossible to confine it to a limited sphere” and hinted at how collective action must lead to coercion, but he did not develop this key idea in any detail.16



As Hayek noted in his reminiscence, he ultimately turned his 1933 memo into a magazine article, published in April 1938, titled “Freedom and the Economic System.” The following year he came out with an expanded version in the form of a public policy pamphlet.17 If one compares the two articles one can trace an accretion of ideas that would later appear in The Road to Serfdom. In the 1938 version, though he continued to stress the links between fascism and socialism, Hayek began to expand on what he saw as the fatal flaw of socialist planning—namely, that it “presupposes a much more complete agreement on the relative importance of the different ends than actually exists, and that, in consequence, in order to be able to plan, the planning authority must impose upon the people that detailed code of values which is lacking.”18 He followed with a much fuller exposition of why even democratic planning, if it were to be successfully carried out, eventually requires the authorities to use a variety of means, from propaganda to coercion, to implement the plan.



In the 1939 version still more ideas were added. Hayek there drew a contrast between central planning and the planning of a general system of rules that occurs under liberalism; he noted how the price system is a mechanism for coordinating knowledge; and he made several observations concerning economic policy under a liberal regime.19 All of these ideas would be incorporated into The Road to Serfdom.



On the one hand, Hayek had developed some of his new arguments in the course of fighting a battle against socialism during the middle years of the decade. On the other hand, some of the arguments were not actually new at all. Another debate on the feasibility of socialism had taken place immediately following the First World War, and Hayek’s mentor, Ludwig von Mises, had contributed a key argument. This earlier controversy had taken place in mostly German-language publications. When Hayek came to England and encountered similar arguments in favor of planning being made by his academic colleagues and in the press, he decided to educate them about the earlier discussion. In 1935 he published the edited volume, Collectivist Economic Planning：Critical Studies on the Possibilities of Socialism.20 The book contained translations of articles by others, including von Mises’s seminal piece “Economic Calculation in the Socialist Commonwealth,” as well as introductory and concluding essays by Hayek.21 In the former Hayek reviewed the earlier Continental debates on socialism; in his concluding essay, titled “The Present State of the Debate,” he identified and assessed a number of more recent proposals, among them the idea of reintroducing competition within a socialist state, dubbed “pseudo-competition” by Hayek, which later came to be called “market socialism.”22 This drew a response from the socialist camp, the most prominent being that of the Polish émigré economist Oskar Lange, whose defense of market socialism in a journal article was later reprinted in a book, On the Economic Theory of Socialism.23 Hayek would respond in turn to Lange and to another proponent of socialism, H. D. Dickinson, in a book review a few years later.24



Hayek’s three essays constitute the written record of his early economic arguments against socialism. But the battle was also taking place in the classrooms (and doubtless spilling over into the senior commons room, as well) at the LSE. Beginning in the 1933–34 summer term (which ran from late April through June) Hayek began offering a class entitled “Problems of a Collectivist Economy.” The socialist response was immediate：the next year students could also enroll in a class titled “Economic Planning in Theory and Practice,” taught first by Hugh Dalton and in later years by Evan Durbin.25 According to the LSE calendar, during the 1936–37 summer term students could hear Hayek from 5 to 6 pm and Durbin from 6 to 7 pm each Thursday night! This may have proved to be too much：the next year their classes were placed in the same time slot on successive days, Durbin on Wednesdays and Hayek on Thursdays.



By the time that World War II was beginning, then, Hayek had criticized, in a book, a journal, and in the classroom, a variety of socialist proposals put forth by his fellow economists. The Road to Serfdom is in many respects a continuation of this work, but it is important to recognize that it also goes beyond the academic debates. By the end of the decade there were many other voices calling for the transformation, sometimes radical, of society. A few held a corporativist view of the good society that bordered on fascism; others sought a middle way; still others were avowedly socialist—but one thing all agreed on, that scientific planning was necessary if Britain was to survive.



Thus in their two volume work Soviet Communism：A New Civilization? Fabian socialists Sidney and Beatrice Webb praised the “Cult of Science” that they had discovered on their visits to the Soviet Union, and held out the hope that scientific planning on a massive scale was the appropriate medicine to aid Britain in its recovery from the depression.26 The sociologist Karl Mannheim, who fled Frankfurt in 1933 and ultimately gained a position on the LSE faculty, warned that only by adopting a comprehensive system of economic planning could Britain avoid the fate of central Europe. For Mannheim, planning was inevitable; the only question was whether it was going to be totalitarian or democratic. These economists were joined by other highly respected public intellectuals, from natural scientists to politicians.27



If planning was the word on everyone’s lips, very few were clear about exactly what it was to entail. The situation was well captured by Hayek’s friend and LSE colleague Lionel Robbins, who in 1937 wrote:



“Planning” is the grand panacea of our age. But unfortunately its meaning is highly ambiguous. In popular discussion it stands for almost any policy which it is wished to present as desirable. . . . When the average citizen, be he Nazi or Communist or Summer School Liberal, warms to the statement that “What the world needs is planning,” what he really feels is that the world needs that which is satisfactory.28



As Robbins’s passage suggests, planners were to be found all along the political spectrum. Sorting out exactly what planning implied for a complex society was to be yet another major theme in Hayek’s coming work.



By 1939, in short, most of the elements for Hayek’s book were present. But its form was not yet in place. When he was not fighting against socialist planners, Hayek had spent much of the rest of his time in the 1930s exhausting himself writing and rewriting a major theoretical work in economics, ultimately published in 1941 as The Pure Theory of Capital.29 That project was finally winding down in August 1939. In a letter to his old university friend Fritz Machlup, Hayek spoke of a new project, one that, through a study of the relationship between scientific method and social problems, would provide a systematic investigation of intellectual history and reveal the fundamental principles of social development of the last one hundred years (from Saint-Simon to Hitler).30 This was to become Hayek’s Abuse of Reason project, and from it would emerge The Road to Serfdom.



Hayek’s War Effort



On September 1, 1939, Germany invaded Poland, and two days later England and France declared war. Within a week, Hayek had sent a letter to the director general of the British Ministry of Information offering his services to aid with any propaganda campaign that might be directed at the German-speaking countries. He enclosed a memo with various suggestions about how to proceed. Hayek proposed a campaign with a historical dimension, one that demonstrated that the principles of liberty that England and France stood for were the same as those that had been enunciated by the great German poets and thinkers of the past, but showing that these had been eclipsed by “the distorted view of history, on which they have been brought up during the last sixty years,” that is, since Bismarck’s time.31 Hayek’s efforts had little effect; in a letter from a staff member dated December 30th his offer to help was politely but firmly turned down.



Once the war began in earnest the next May most of his colleagues from the LSE had been called to duty in various government departments. Though he was naturalized as a British subject in 1938, as an émigré Hayek was not offered a post, so he spent the war teaching his classes and writing. Hayek was clearly frustrated that the British government had no place for him, complaining in a letter to Machlup that he was “getting really annoyed by the refusal to use a person like myself on any useful work. . . .”32 By this time, however, Hayek’s intellectual history was well under way. In his letter to Machlup, Hayek provided an outline of the book, noting that “[t]he second part would of course be an elaboration of the central argument of my pamphlet on Freedom and the Economic System.”33 The first part of the book would be called “Hubris,” the second, “Nemesis.”



Hayek worked on the Abuse of Reason project for the rest of 1940, completing a number of historical chapters and beginning some others on methodology.34 Toward the end of the year, though, he began transforming the last part of the book into what would become The Road to Serfdom, a book that he initially envisioned as coming out “as a sixpence Penguin volume.”35 Why did Hayek decide to abandon his larger historical endeavor—he never completed the Abuse of Reason project—to focus on a shorter, more popular, and admittedly “political” tract? We will probably never have a definitive answer, but certain plausible reasons stand out. Were the Allies to lose the war, western civilization in Europe itself would be the cost. But Hayek was also worried about what would transpire if the Allies won.



Mobilization for war requires a massive reallocation of resources away from the production of peacetime consumer goods and capital toward the production of war materials. Factories are commandeered, their machines retooled for wartime production, and decisions about what to produce are made at the center. With fewer consumer goods being produced, the prospect of inflation looms (particularly harmful during wartime, because it hurts debtors, just when the government is trying to convince its citizens to become debtors by buying war bonds). To avoid inflation further intervention is necessary, and the standard policy response is to fix prices and institute a system of rationing. This essentially does away with a freely adjusting price system for basic consumer goods. Bluntly put, during war the market system is more or less abandoned, as many parts of the economy are placed under central control. Hayek’s fear was that socialists would want to continue such controls in peacetime.



There was precedence for such a fear. Even before the First World War had begun, the philosopher Otto Neurath had been touting the doctrine of “war economy” in Eugen von Böhm-Bawerk’s economics seminar in Vienna, much to the chagrin of seminar participant Ludwig von Mises. Neurath claimed that central planning under wartime conditions provided an exemplar for how to run an economy in peacetime. His and others’ proposals for the socialization of the postwar economy provoked Mises to formulate his initial critique of socialist planning. Interestingly, Neurath was still on the scene when Hayek was writing：when hostilities started in earnest Neurath had fled Holland and would spend the war in Oxford.36



The British were not Continental socialists, but still, the danger signs were there. Clearly, the nearly universal sentiment among the intelligentsia in the 1930s that a planned system represented “the middle way” between a failed capitalism and totalitarianisms of the left and right was worrisome. The writings of what Hayek called the “men (and women!) of science” could not be ignored. Look at this message from the weekly magazine Nature, taken from an editorial that carried the title “Science and the National War Effort”:



The contribution of science to the war effort should be a major one, for which the Scientific Advisory Committee may well be largely responsible. Moreover, the work must not cease with the end of the war. It does not follow that an organization which is satisfactory under the stress of modern warfare will serve equally well in time of peace; but the principle of the immediate concern of science in formulating policy and in other ways exerting a direct and sufficient influence on the course of government is one to which we must hold fast. Science must seize the opportunity to show that it can lead mankind onward to a better form of society.37



The very next week readers of Nature would find similar sentiments echoed in Barbara Wootton’s review of a book on Marxism：“The whole approach to social and political questions is still pre-scientific. Until we have renounced tribal magic in favour of the detached and relentless accuracy characteristic of science the unconquered social environment will continue to make useless and dangerous our astonishing conquest of the material environment.”38 Progressive opinion was united behind the idea that science was to be enlisted to reconstruct society along more rational lines.



There were also more overtly political forces to be reckoned with, forces whose hopes for the postwar world became increasingly clear as the conflict began to turn in favor of the allies. In early 1942 the Labour Party issued a pamphlet, The Old World and the New Society, that laid out the principles for reconstruction after the war. Here are some of its key claims:



There must be no return to the unplanned competitive world of the inter-War years, in which a privileged few were maintained at the expense of the common good . . .



A planned society must replace the old competitive system . . .



The basis for our democracy must be planned production for community use . . .



As a necessary prerequisite to the reorganization of society, the main Wartime controls in industry and agriculture should be maintained to avoid the scramble for profits which followed the last war.39



These ideas were incorporated into a resolution proposed by Harold Laski and passed at the Party Conference on May 26, 1942. In his speech defending the resolution, Laski noted that “Nationalization of the essential instruments of production before the war ends, the maintenance of control over production and distribution after the war—this is the spearhead of this resolution.”40



Party boilerplate is one thing, concrete plans as how to carry it out are quite another. A start at the latter was made in the famous Beveridge Report.41



The story of how Hayek’s former director at the LSE came to chair the Interdepartmental Committee on Social Insurance and Allied Services is not without interest. The committee was originally set up in early 1941 to respond to trade union complaints about the mishmash of government programs then in existence to provide for unemployment benefits, sick pay, pensions, and the like. The Treasury, busy trying to finance the war, did not want a comprehensive review, fearing it would only lead to recommendations for further expenditures. They pushed for the appointment of a “safe” chairman who would do a patch-up job, and made sure that the committee was staffed principally with equally safe middle-level civil servants. But then the Minister of Labour Ernest Bevin intervened, and ultimately prevailed in having Beveridge appointed to chair the committee, his motivation being, according to one account, to get “the pushy Beveridge at last out of his Ministry”!42



By December 1941 Beveridge had received only one of the 127 pieces of evidence that his committee would ultimately collect, but this did not deter him from circulating a paper that contained most of the main points that would be contained in the final report. Beveridge turned out to be anything but safe. His proposals provided the foundations for the postwar British welfare state, including the provision of family allowances, comprehensive social insurance, universal health care coverage, and a government obligation to maintain full employment.



Though the Treasury was horrified at the projected cost of the plan, over the course of 1942 Beveridge, through public appearances, radio talks, and the like, managed to leak to the press the broad outlines of the report, thereby building up popular support and undermining the ability of the government to either ignore or dismiss it. He was successful as impresario：when the 299-page government document was finally released on December 2, 1942, the line for it at the government bookshop was said to have been over a mile long.43 It ultimately sold about a half a million copies, influencing policy not just in Britain, but worldwide. (In America, an edition that was “reproduced photographically from the English edition” to ensure a speedy delivery was quickly made available and sold about fifty thousand copies.)44



The Beveridge Report was an immediate success. The British economy had been stagnant throughout the interwar period, and no one wanted a return to such deprivation. The common sacrifices that the war necessitated bred a feeling that all should similarly share more equally in the reconstruction to come. Universal medical provision was itself virtually a fact of life during the first few years of the war, certainly for anyone injured by aerial bombing or whose work was tied to the war effort—and whose work was not, in one way or another? The war, then, was transforming the climate, and Beveridge’s hope—and he was not alone—was to build on this transformation in the future.45 Indeed, the first of the “Three Guiding Principles of Recommendations” with which he began his report made the link explicit：“Now, when the war is abolishing landmarks of every kind, is the opportunity for using experience in a clear field. A revolutionary moment in the world’s history is a time for revolutions, not for patching.”46



Having come to his majority in interwar Vienna, Hayek doubtless experienced an intense and disquieting sense of déjà vu on reading such words. In his book he sought to reverse the trends that were everywhere evident in Britain. Making the economic case against socialist planning was not enough. He needed to remind the British of their liberal democratic heritage, to contrast it with the collectivist or corporativist authoritarian modes of social organization promoted by its enemies, and finally, to make clear (notwithstanding the rhetoric of “planning for freedom”) that the actual implementation of a centrally planned society would be inimical to liberty.



Finding an American Publisher



In a letter dated August 8, 1942, Hayek asked Fritz Machlup, who was by then in Washington at the Office of Alien Property Custodian, for his help in securing an American publisher. Machlup’s wartime letters to Hayek may have helped him to realize that his message might be needed as an antidote in the States as well as in Britain：“If you talk here with people over 40 years of age— except Hansen—they sound sane and relatively conservative. It is the generation brought up by Keynes and Hansen, which is blind to the political implications of their economic views.”47 By summer’s end Hayek sent Machlup a typescript that included all but the final three substantive chapters, two of which would deal with his recommendations for the postwar period. He would mail these to his friend over the course of the next year.48



Machlup’s first stop was Macmillan, but they turned him down.49 Machlup later reported to Hayek what they said in their letter：“Frankly, we are doubtful of the sale which we could secure for it, and I personally cannot but feel that Professor Hayek is a little outside the stream of much present-day thought, both here and in England.”50 Machlup’s next move was, at Hayek’s request, to send the (by now completed) typescript to Walter Lippmann, who would promote it to Little, Brown. This was done, but they also declined, on the grounds that “the exposition was too difficult for the general reader.”51 Machlup then turned to Henry Gideonse, by now the President of Brooklyn College, but who previously had served as the editor of the series of public policy pamphlets in which “Freedom and the Economic System” had appeared. Gideonse took the manuscript with his strong endorsement to Ordway Tead, the economics editor at Harper and Brothers. This initiative also failed. In a sentence that in some ways exemplifies his own complaint, Tead explained why Harper would not publish it：“I do feel that the volume is labored, is over-written and that he can say all that he has to say in about half the space.”52



Nearly a year had gone by and Machlup’s search for an American publisher had yielded nothing. It was at this point that Aaron Director came to the rescue.53 Director worked alongside Machlup in Washington, and had read the typescript in the summer of 1943. In October, Director wrote to fellow Chicago economists Frank Knight and Henry Simons to see if the University of Chicago Press might want to consider publishing it. Though he never received an answer, apparently Knight did recommend that the Press have a look. Toward the end of the next month Director sent the galley proofs from the English edition (which had arrived in the interim) to Chicago, asking for an immediate decision.54



The Press complied, asking Knight to evaluate the manuscript. In his reader’s report, dated December 10, 1943, the irascible Chicago professor provided a decidedly lukewarm endorsement. He began the report by calling the book “a masterly performance of the job it undertakes” and admitted that he was sympathetic to its main conclusions. But he followed this with a two-page discussion of the book’s weaknesses, concluding that, “‘[i]n sum, the book is an able piece of work, but limited in scope and somewhat one-sided in treatment. I doubt whether it would have a very wide market in this country, or would change the position of many readers.”55



Knight’s distinctly ambivalent report could easily have resulted in the Press rejecting the manuscript. Instead, Acting Editor John T. McNeill took it to mean that it was worthy of further consideration. On December 14 he asked another Chicago economist, Jacob Marschak, to provide a second reader’s report. Marschak, a socialist, was far more complimentary, writing six days later that “Hayek’s book may start in this country a more scholarly kind of debate. . . . It is written with the passion and the burning clarity of a great doctrinaire. . . . This book cannot be bypassed.”56 Based on the two reports, the publication committee at the Press decided to undertake an American edition. The acceptance letter to Hayek was dated December 28, 1943.



There were still details to be settled, and Machlup acted in Hayek’s behalf concerning most of these, even to the point of accepting Chicago’s offer for Hayek in early January—it was nearly a month later when Hayek finally got the news.57 One major decision was to completely reset the type, this because in the British edition Hayek frequently referred to England as “this country.”58 Two other changes were suggested by the Press, but both were rejected. The first was to change the name to Socialism：The Road to Serfdom. Both Machlup and Hayek thought that the proposed title was misleading, because socialism was only one of a subset of doctrines the book criticized. Central planning could be undertaken by parties on the right as well as the left; this was Hayek’s point when he dedicated the book to socialists of all parties. The other proposal was to eliminate the aphorisms with which Hayek began each chapter. Hayek was sufficiently appalled by the latter suggestion that he followed up his letter of protest with a cable reading “Cannot consent to omission of quotations from Road to Serfdom.”59 The quotations were retained, including one from David Hume on the title page. Inexplicably, a quotation from Tocqueville that appeared on the title page of the British edition was dropped from the original American one, and in some of the later reprints the Hume quotation was moved off of the title page to the following one. Both have been restored to their rightful place on the title page in the current edition.60



Publication：From Minor Hit to Cultural Icon



The Road to Serfdom appeared on March 10, 1944, in England. The initial print run was 2,000 copies, and due to the strong demand (it sold out in about a month’s time) a second printing of 2,500 was immediately ordered. That one quickly sold out as well, but nothing further could be done until a new paper quota was announced in July. Paper shortages would plague British production of the book for the duration and beyond.61 July also saw the publication of an Australian edition.62



The American edition, with a run of 2,000 copies, came out on September 18, 1944, a Monday, though advance copies had been sent to reviewers earlier. Henry Hazlitt’s laudatory front page review appeared in the next Sunday’s New York Times Book Review section, and another graced the pages of the Herald Tribune. By September 28 a second and third printing had been ordered, bringing the total to 17,000 copies.63 The Press had a minor hit on its hands.



At the end of October a letter arrived at the Press that would help turn it into a major hit and a cultural icon. On the recommendation of Henry Gideonse, the Press had sent a copy of the book to Max Eastman, then a “roving editor” for The Reader’s Digest. Eastman liked it so much that he asked the owner and editor-in-chief, DeWitt Wallace, for permission to do a condensation.64 This appeared in April 1945, and it carried with it an offer of reprints, available through the Book-of-the-Month Club, for a nickel apiece. (Bulk orders were also possible：if one wanted 1,000 copies, it cost $18.) The Reader’s Digest had at the time a circulation of about 8,750,000, and over a million of the reprints were eventually printed and distributed.65



Hayek arrived in the States in the beginning of April 1945 for a five-week lecture tour to promote his book. He crossed the Atlantic by boat, and while he was in transit the Reader’s Digest issue appeared. Though the tour was initially envisioned to consist of academic lectures before various university departments of economics, by the time he arrived the tour had been turned over to a professional organization (the National Concerts and Artists Corporation) that had added a number of public appearances. The first event, a lecture sponsored by the Town Hall Club in New York, drew an overflow crowd of more than 3,000 listeners and was broadcast over the radio. Hayek was initially overwhelmed by the idea of speaking to such large, popular audiences, but, as he later recounted, he eventually warmed to the task.66



But it is also clear (and quite understandable, given his personality) that Hayek was a bit embarrassed by all the adulation, especially from those who might have gotten their only knowledge of his views from a 20-page condensation (or worse, from the cartoon edition that had appeared in the February 1945 issue of Look magazine).67 He seemed particularly worried about being misinterpreted. Thus in a Chicago newspaper under a banner that read in part “Friedrich Hayek Comments on Uses to Which His Book Has Been Put” he stated, “I was at first a bit puzzled and even alarmed when I found that a book written in no party spirit and not meant to support any popular philosophy should have been so exclusively welcomed by one party and so thoroughly excoriated by the other.”68 He repeatedly emphasized in his talks before business groups that he was not against government intervention per se：“I think what is needed is a clear set of principles which enables us to distinguish between the legitimate fields of government activities and the illegitimate fields of government activity. You must cease to argue for and against government activity as such.”69



He also feared that certain parts of his message would be ignored. For example, businessmen who might be quite eager to get “government off of our backs” might be equally eager to demand that the government protect their industries from foreign competition. Responding to a question about tariffs in a discussion following his speech in Washington, DC, Hayek bluntly asserted：“If you have any comprehension of my philosophy at all, you must know that one thing I stand for above all else is free trade throughout the world.” The man offering the anecdote added that, with that, “the temperature of the room went down at least 10 degrees.”70



The trip to the United States gave Hayek his “15 minutes of fame,” but it was also important for more substantive reasons. On the trip he first encountered Mr. Harold Luhnow, a Kansas City businessman who was interested in funding a study of how to foster an effective competitive order in the United States. After subsequent negotiations it was agreed that the study would be undertaken at the University of Chicago, and though it was never completed, the project helped to bring together in one place the various principals who would help create the “Chicago School of Economics”—Aaron Director, Milton Friedman, and, later, George Stigler. These men would all attend, in 1947, the first meeting of the Mont Pèlerin Society, an international society of scholars founded by Hayek whose goal was “to contribute to the preservation and improvement of the free society.”71 A few years later Hayek would himself emigrate from London to the University of Chicago, though there he would join the Committee on Social Thought rather than the Economics Department.72



If Hayek was surprised by the enthusiastic reception of the book in some quarters, he was likely equally surprised at how it was savaged in others. Hayek had expected criticism, of course, and as an academic was looking forward to it, for it would mean that people were engaging his arguments.73 He doubtless had in mind the sort of response he received from the English socialist Barbara Wootton, whose “courteous and frank” work Hayek mentioned in his 1956 foreword to the American paperback edition.74 And indeed, with the exception of some Labour Party politicians, Hayek’s challengers in Britain by and large took his views seriously, and responded to them accordingly.75



The situation was different in the United States. The worst of the lot, Herman Finer’s scabrous Road to Reaction, was also picked out for mentioning by Hayek in the 1956 foreword. The overarching message of the book was evident in its very first sentence：“Friedrich A. Hayek’s The Road to Serfdom constitutes the most sinister offensive against democracy to emerge from a democratic country for many decades.”76 According to Finer, Hayek’s call for constitutionalism and advocacy of the rule of law was indicative of his antidemocratic biases, the “very essence” of Hayek’s argument being “the idea that democracy is dangerous and ought to be limited.”77 Toward the end of the book (published, we remember, in 1945) we find Finer remarking on “the thoroughly Hitlerian contempt for the democratic man so perfectly expressed by Hayek.”78 Other pundits of the day took different tacks：George Soule, for example, was quick to label him “the darling of the Chamber of Commerce.”79 The left-leaning PM newspaper launched an exposé showing how business interests promoted the “selling” of Hayek’s message. The author’s concluding sentences capture well many people’s perception of the reception of the book in America：“Hayek’s book—and the Look and Reader’s Digest treatments of it—gave big business a wonderful opportunity to spread distrust and fear of the New Deal. Big business seized the opportunity.”80



Perhaps recognizing that nothing sells like controversy, the Press sent Hayek a copy of Finer’s book when it appeared in December 1945, and asked whether he might want to add a new chapter to the end of the next edition of The Road to Serfdom, in which he would reply to his critics. Hayek worked on such a postscript on and off over the next few years. A partially completed draft, dated 1948, exists in his archives, and elements of this would ultimately be incorporated into the 1956 foreword.81 It is notable, and characteristic, that Hayek’s response there was not to lash out at his critics, but rather to try to explain the differences in the receptions he received in England and the United States, again by emphasizing the different experiences that people in the two countries had had with socialism.82



It is hard to imagine that Hayek’s book would have become so widely known, remembered decades after its original publication, had it not been for the Reader’s Digest condensation. This allowed Hayek’s message to reach many more people, and in at least one instance with dramatic effect：Antony Fisher, the founder of the Institute of Economic Affairs, and after it a prime mover in the foundation of many other conservative think tanks, was inspired to wage the war of ideas after having read the condensation and then speaking with Hayek in his LSE office in the summer of 1945.83 But the condensation also turned the book into a symbol for both his admirers and his critics. The sad result is that, as John Scoon put it, “People still tend to go off half-cocked about it; why don’t they read it and find out what Hayek actually says!”84 In the next section some oft-heard criticisms of the book are briefly reviewed and assessed. We will see that some are less justified than others.



Some Prominent Criticisms



One of the earliest criticisms concerned the historical accuracy of his claims. A good example is the objection raised by Frank Knight, who in his reader’s report insisted that German history was far more complicated than Hayek had portrayed it; that, for example, the socialist policies in place since Bismarck’s time comprised only one element in explaining the subsequent trajectory of the country. I doubt that Hayek would deny this; if he did, he would certainly be on very shaky ground. Nonetheless, if this part of his thesis seems overstated, it is only fair to recall the original structure of Hayek’s argument. The Road to Serfdom was intended to be the final section of a much larger project, in which Hayek would trace the gradual decline of liberalism in a number of different countries. Hayek’s specific arguments about Germany make much more sense within the context of this larger project. His decision to publish as a separate piece the conclusion of his work is akin to offering a punch line without the joke.



We must also remember the sorts of arguments he was trying to confront with his thesis. As Hayek frequently repeated, many intelligent and informed people of his day had been taken in by the claim that National Socialism was the next logical and historical phase of a collapsing capitalism. His point, one that most would accept today as evident, was that fascism and communism both represent totalitarian systems that have much more in common with each other than either does with the sorts of governments and economic systems that exist under liberal free market democracies. The Nazis demonized and persecuted the communists, to be sure, but it was not because they were themselves capitalists. Hayek simply sought to establish the true commonalities.



Another oft-voiced complaint was that Hayek’s book was long on criticism but short on or vague concerning proposed alternatives. After ten years of economic depression, many people felt that capitalism had finally breathed its last and that something new had to replace it. What was Hayek offering? Writing in The New Republic, Alvin Hansen noted that Hayek distinguished in his book between “good planning” and “bad planning,” then asked Hayek to inform his readers precisely how he would draw the line between the two.85 John Maynard Keynes read the book on the way to the Bretton Woods conference, and delighted Hayek when he wrote him that it was “a grand book” and that “morally and philosophically I find myself in agreement with virtually the whole of it; and not only in agreement with it, but in a deeply moved agreement.”86 Keynes went on to say, though, that “You admit here and there that it is a question of knowing where to draw the line. You agree that the line has to be drawn somewhere, and that the logical extreme is not possible. But you give us no guidance whatever as to where to draw it.”87



Hayek evidently took these criticisms to heart, for in the coming years he would make two further important contributions to political philosophy that would refine and extend the arguments made in The Road to Serfdom. In The Constitution of Liberty he laid out the philosophical foundations of liberal constitutionalism, wherein a private sphere of individual activity is defined, the state is granted a monopoly on coercion, and then is constitutionally limited by the rule of law in its use of those coercive powers. In the last third of the book Hayek outlined the specific sorts of government policies that were consistent with such a political setup.88 In Law, Legislation, and Liberty, Hayek lamented how western democracies were increasingly circumventing the spirit of liberal constitutionalism by passing coercive legislation, typically under the guise of achieving social justice, but in reality serving well-organized coalitions of special interests. The book also included a unique proposal for legislative reform aimed at reestablishing the ideal of a constitutionally constrained liberal democratic commonwealth.89



A third complaint is that Hayek’s argument against socialism in The Road to Serfdom is unconvincing because, by failing to address “market socialism,” it must be viewed as incomplete. Evan Durbin, Hayek’s old sparring partner at the LSE, was one of the first to enunciate the argument, chiding Hayek in his review in the Economic Journal for making “only one reference to the work of those of us who are both practicing economists and also Socialists, and that in a footnote,” thereby neglecting “all recent writings on the subject.”90 According to Durbin, “democratic socialism” need not imply any “rigid programme of production” but only that “the final responsibility for taking economic decisions is transferred from the private company or group of shareholders to the representatives of the community. . . .”91 Durbin’s “democratic socialism” was a variant of the market socialism (sometimes also referred to by Hayek as “competitive socialism”) that Oskar Lange had articulated in On the Economic Theory of Socialism. As was noted earlier, Hayek had already criticized this doctrine in a review of the Lange volume published in 1940. It was to this review that Hayek referred in his long note on market socialism in The Road to Serfdom.92



Market socialism may sound like an oxymoron, but it is a position that has seldom failed to intrigue economists seeking “the middle way.” Market socialists are critics of capitalism, to be sure, but they accept as a starting premise that perfectly competitive markets have certain desirable efficiency characteristics. Crucially, however, they deny that any real world markets resemble those described under perfect competition. The days of atomistic competition disappeared when cartels and monopolies began emerging in the late nineteenth century. Contemporary capitalism, then, lacks the beneficial aspects of competition, while retaining all of its defects. A planned market socialist economy would restore true competition with all of its benefits while simultaneously correcting the myriad social injustices associated with unfettered capitalism. In Lange’s specific blueprint for a market socialist society, there exist free markets for both consumer goods and labor, but (because of public ownership of the means of production) no market for productive resources. A Central Planning Board would provide prices, adjusting them up or down (using a “trial-and-error” method) depending on revealed shortages or surpluses.



Market socialism is attractive because it seems to combine the best parts of rival systems：the efficiency of a market-based system and egalitarian policies aimed at promoting social justice, all combined within a democratic polity. In his review, Hayek raised a number of pertinent questions about the details of Lange’s plan, most of which suggested that though market socialism sounded good, it would not work. One of his key complaints was that Lange had neglected to say how often prices would need to be adjusted in his proposed system. This was an important issue, for even with relatively quick adjustments (something that Hayek thought would be difficult to sustain) Hayek maintained that an extensive system of price fixing would still always be playing catch-up relative to the adjustments that would take place in a market system, and so would be less efficient. In making his points, Hayek wrote, famously, that “it is difficult to suppress the suspicion that this particular proposal has been born out of an excessive preoccupation with problems of the pure theory of stationary equilibrium.”93 Hayek’s later and much fuller development of how markets work to coordinate social and economic activity in a world in which knowledge is dispersed—a world very different from that described by the theory of stationary equilibrium—would become one of his central contributions to economics.



Hayek, then, had already articulated a set of arguments against market socialism. Why did he relegate them to a note in The Road to Serfdom? One clue is given by a letter that Lange wrote to Hayek on July 31, 1940, in which he responded to Hayek’s review and tried to clear up a misunderstanding:



I do not propose price fixing by a real central planning board, as a practical solution. It was used, in my paper, only as a methodological device to show how equilibrium prices can be determined by trial and error even in the absence of a market in the institutional sense of the word. Practically, I should, of course recommend the determination of the prices by a thorough market process whenever this is feasible. . . .94



Hayek might be forgiven if he were to infer from this letter that Lange had basically accepted his criticisms about the practical feasibility of market socialism. Though obviously Durbin thought differently, Hayek felt that market socialism was little more than an interesting theoretical exercise, the sort of thing that economists like to play with on the blackboard, but not something to be taken seriously as practical proposal.



But even more to the point, Hayek did not write The Road to Serfdom chiefly with theoretical economists like Lange or Durbin in mind. Unlike such economists, most advocates of “planning” had not even begun to think through what it meant to have a planned society. For them, planning itself was, as Robbins had put it, a panacea. It was this vague but widespread sentiment for which The Road to Serfdom was meant to be an antidote. Hayek was trying to show his readers that planning, everyone’s favorite remedy for the ills of the world, might sound good in theory, but would not work in practice (or, at least, not unless the western democracies were prepared to accept severe constraints on personal liberty of the sort on display in the systems against which they currently were fighting.)



This explains, I think, why Hayek did not bother to lay out the argument against market socialism in his book. He felt that market socialism was only a theoretical dream, and that the details of the argument against it would be out of place in a general book. His economist readers, he doubtless presumed, were already aware of the arguments he had made in 1940, arguments he felt had succeeded. If they weren’t, he reminded them with a note.



As such, one could understand that Hayek felt a bit miffed by Durbin’s insinuation that he had neglected all the recent work. His irritation is evident in the unpublished version of his 1948 postscript.



Mr. Durbin . . . is especially pained that I have not taken more seriously and devoted no more than a note to the interesting schemes of a competitive socialism which have been put forward in recent years in a number of learned books and articles. I am quite ready to discuss their theoretical merits and have in fact done so at some length in an article quoted in the footnote just referred to. And I shall be very glad to examine these plans further as soon as there are any signs that they are taken seriously by, and exercise any practical influence on the politics of, the socialist parties. But I have yet to find any socialist party which is willing even to consider using competition as the method for organizing economic activity, and until this is the case I cannot see that anyone but the specialist need be bothered with the objections to those ingenious schemes. But I may perhaps be allowed to add that I should have more confidence in the genuineness of the desire to reconcile freedom and socialism by means of a “competitive socialism” if one of the main advocates of these schemes, Professor Oskar Lange, had not chosen to become one of the main spokesmen of the Russian point of view on the Council of the United Nations and if Mr. Durbin were not now himself a member of the Socialist British Government which is doing most of the things of which he apparently disapproves.95



Durbin would die in a drowning accident in 1948, which may explain why this passage was never included in the foreword. Alas, Lange’s accommodation to the political realities in his native Poland would only increase through time：he went on to write apologetics for Stalin and, renouncing his earlier views on market socialism, even went so far as to forbid their republication in Polish.96



Though Lange and Durbin are gone, the dreams for market socialism among economic theorists never seem to die, the most recent revival occurring after the collapse of the Soviet bloc in the last decade of the last century. Its longevity is easy to explain：for those who seek a middle way, market socialism is the ideal system. In more recent discussions, Hayek’s original critique has been substantially bolstered by additional arguments, some from the economics of information that identify incentive problems, others from public choice analysis that identify political obstacles that would confront any such regime.97 But it is perhaps sufficient to say, as Hayek did in 1948, that until a real-world example of such an “ingenious scheme” is forthcoming, it is best considered a theoretical construct of interest only to specialists, one that has no particular relevance for the world in which we actually live.



A final criticism has sometimes been called the “inevitability thesis” or the “slippery slope” argument：Hayek is claimed to have said that, once a society engages in a little planning, it is doomed to end up in a totalitarian state. Durbin was among those making this charge, writing that Hayek believed that “any departure from the practice of free enterprise, any hope that reason and science may be applied to the direction of economic activity, any attempt at economic planning, must lead us remorselessly to serfdom. . . .”98 If Durbin’s statement of the inevitability thesis seems unusually stark, he was certainly not alone in thinking that Hayek had said that any expansion of state control over the economy would necessarily lead to a totalitarian outcome. Those who so interpreted him spanned the ideological spectrum from Barbara Wootton to George Stigler.99 Paul Samuelson even expressed the idea diagrammatically in his principles of economics text, drawing political freedom on one axis, economic freedom on the other, and a movement down the curve (slippery slope indeed!) from high to low levels of both being what Hayek supposedly predicted：“that government modification of laissez faire must lead inevitably to political serfdom.”100



This interpretation occurred despite Hayek’s frequent protests to the contrary. Sometimes he objected publicly, as he did in the preface to the 1976 edition：“It has frequently been alleged that I have contended that any movement in the direction of socialism is bound to lead to totalitarianism. Even though this danger exists, this is not what the book says.”101

In private he could be both more forceful and explicit, as may be seen in his letter to Paul Samuelson:



I am afraid in glancing through the 11th edition of your Economics I seem to have discovered the source of the false allegation about my book The Road to Serfdom which I constantly encounter, most resent and can only regard as a malicious distortion which has largely succeeded in discrediting my argument . . . [Y]ou assert that I contend that “each step away from the market system and towards the social reform of the welfare state is inevitably a journey that must end in a totalitarian state” and that “government modification of market laissez faire must lead inevitably to political serfdom.” . . .



How anyone who has read my book can in good faith say this when ever since the first edition I say right at the beginning . . . “Nor am I arguing that these developments are inevitable. If they were, there would be no point in writing this. They can be prevented if people realize in time where their efforts may lead. . . .”102



Given the ubiquity of the “inevitability thesis” interpretation among both his friends and his foes, as well as Hayek’s own insistence that this was not his argument, it is important to try to figure out exactly what has given rise to the confusion.



Hayek’s letter to Samuelson allows us to rule out one way of interpreting the word “inevitability.” Hayek was decidedly not making the historical claim that, no matter what future moves were made in Britain and America, there was no turning back, that a socialist future that would end in totalitarianism was inevitably coming. This kind of inevitability thesis was, after all, exactly what Hayek was criticizing in his essay “Scientism and the Study of Society,” when he attacked historicism, the belief that there were historical laws knowledge of which allowed one to predict a necessary future.



A more plausible way to read Hayek’s words is to see him as warning that, unless we change our ways, we are headed down the road to serfdom. It was certainly part of Hayek’s intent to issue such a warning. He was in particular afraid that we might embark on such a path without really realizing it, or, as he put it in his speech before the Economic Club of Detroit, “the danger is the greater because we may choose the wrong way, not by deliberation and concerted decision, but because we seem to be blundering into it.”103 As the title of his fourth chapter makes clear, some of Hayek’s opponents had made the claim that planning was “inevitable,” that unless we embraced “planning for freedom” we were headed toward totalitarianism. Hayek presumably was hoping to stand such an argument on its head, to show that, rather than the only means of counteracting totalitarianism, planning itself constituted a significant step along the way toward the totalitarian state.



Yet another way to read Hayek is to see him as offering a logical rather than a historical argument. Hayek recognized that “liberal socialists” value freedom of choice and the honoring of individual preferences. What he denied was that they could maintain those values and still carry out their proclaimed program of extensive central planning. As he succinctly put it, “socialism can be put into practice only by methods which most socialists disapprove.”104 Even if it were to begin as a “liberal socialist” experiment (none of the real-world cases have ever done so, one might add), full-scale planning requires that the planning authorities take over all production decisions; to be able to make any decisions at all, they would need to exercise more and more political control. If one tries to create a truly planned society, one will not be able to separate out control of the economy from political control. This was Hayek’s logical argument against planning, one that he had succinctly articulated in 1939 in “Freedom and the Economic System.”



In the end agreement that planning is necessary, together with the inability of the democratic assembly to agree on a particular plan, must strengthen the demand that the government, or some single individual, should be given powers to act on their own responsibility. It becomes more and more the accepted belief that, if one wants to get things done, the responsible director of affairs must be freed from the fetters of democratic procedure.105



Now evidently, in the years since he wrote, the countries that Hayek was most concerned about (the Western European democracies and the United States), despite the rhetoric of their left-wing politicians, did not go to anything like complete central planning or full nationalization of the means of production. For example, though there was a movement in this direction in Britain directly after the war, it reached its high point by the late 1940s, and even then only about 20 per cent of British industry was nationalized.



Those who see Hayek as issuing a prediction of an inevitable trend would view this history as refuting his claim. Those who see him as providing a warning might consider thanking him for saving them from disaster. If one confronts Hayek’s logical argument, however, the subsequent paths of the western European democracies are not really tests of Hayek’s thesis. To be sure, many of them did develop substantial welfare states, and Hayek spoke about the separate dangers of these in his later writings. But the existence of such states, and whatever successes they may or may not have had, does not undermine Hayek’s logical argument from The Road to Serfdom：a welfare state is not socialism.



The proper way to evaluate Hayek’s logical thesis is to ask, How many actually existing, real-world political systems have fully nationalized their means of production and preserved both some measure of economic efficiency and freedom of choice over goods and occupations? Count them up. Then compare the number with those that nationalized their means of production and turned to extensive planning and control, and with it the curtailment of individual liberties. If one agrees that this is the right test, Hayek’s position is fully vindicated：full socialism can only be put into practice by using methods of which most socialists would disapprove.



The Continuing Relevance of The Road to Serfdom



Reading (or perhaps rereading) The Road to Serfdom will be a pleasurable experience for some, and induce apoplexy in others：it continues to be a lightning rod, as well as a Rorschach test, revealing as much about the reader’s prior commitments as it does about Hayek’s ideas. For younger readers the book may also be a bit of a mystery, for though it has elements of a general treatise (more on which anon), it was also very much (as he himself once admitted) a “tract for the times.”106 Modern readers who are not familiar with the history of the Third Reich may stumble over names like Julius Streicher or Robert Ley. And who today still recalls Sir Richard Acland’s “Forward March” movement, or the Temporary National Economic Committee? As editor, I have tried to provide brief notes that place these individuals, groups, and ideas in context, in an effort to make it easier for readers today to enter the world that Hayek inhabited.



At the same time, the book is also filled with timeless ideas. Hayek’s immediate objective was to persuade his British audience that their heritage of liberal democracy under the rule of law should be viewed as a national treasure rather than an object of scorn, as a still-vital roadmap for organizing society rather than an embarrassing relic of times gone by. Though much depends on how one defines one’s terms, his was a message that invites more than occasional reexamination.



Another theme, evident perhaps more explicitly in this introduction than in specific passages in Hayek’s own text, but nonetheless very much a part of his underlying motivation in writing the book, is Hayek’s warning concerning the dangers that times of war pose for established civil societies—for it is during such times when hard-won civil liberties are most likely to be all-too-easily given up. Even more troubling, politicians instinctively recognize the seductive power of war. Times of national emergency permit the invocation of a common cause and a common purpose. War enables leaders to ask for sacrifices. It presents an enemy against which all segments of society may unite. This is true of real war, but because of its ability to unify disparate groups, savvy politicians from all parties find it effective to invoke war metaphors in a host of contexts. The war on drugs, the war on poverty, and the war on terror are but three examples from recent times.107 What makes these examples even more worrisome than true wars is that none has a logical endpoint; each may be invoked forever.



Hayek’s message was to be wary of such martial invocations. His specific fear was that, for a war to be fought effectively, the power and size of the state must grow. No matter what rhetoric they employ, politicians and the bureaucracies over which they preside love power, and power is never easily surrendered once the danger, if there ever was one, has passed. Though eternal vigilance is sage advice, surely “wartime” (or when politicians would try to convince us that it is such a time) is when those who value the preservation of individual liberty must be most on guard.108



Finally, what one finds in this book, and in all of Hayek’s work, is a clear recognition of the power of ideas. It was perhaps John Maynard Keynes who said it best, in the closing chapter of The General Theory:



the ideas of economists and political philosophers, both when they are right and when they are wrong, are more powerful than commonly understood. Indeed the world is ruled by little else. Practical men, who believe themselves to be quite exempt from any intellectual influences, are usually the slaves of some defunct economist. Madmen in authority, who hear voices in the air, are distilling their frenzy from some academic scribbler of a few years back. I am sure that the power of vested interests is vastly exaggerated compared with the gradual encroachment of ideas.109



Hayek would have offered his immediate assent, adding, perhaps, that Keynes’s passage carries with it the implication that those who fail to understand the origins of the ideas do so at their peril. Given the many years of his life that he spent diligently toiling, the perennial advocate of causes that most of his contemporaries thought of as lost, anachronistic, or a return to reaction, perhaps no person better represents the notion of the power of ideas in the twentieth century than does F. A. Hayek.



Bruce Caldwell

1 Wendell Wilkie, One World (New York：Simon and Schuster, 1943).



2 In his “Note on Publishing History” prepared for the fiftieth anniversary edition of the book, Milton Friedman noted that by 1994 Chicago had sold approximately 250,000 copies, and that nearly twenty authorized translations had been published. The 350,000 figure is an estimate provided by the Press in 2005. Friedman’s introduction and note may be found in the appendix.



3 Letter, Isaiah Berlin to Elizabeth Morrow, April 4, 1945, reprinted in Isaiah Berlin：Letters, 1928– 46, ed. Henry Hardy (Cambridge：Cambridge University Press, 2004), p. 540.



4 Letter, Gardiner Means to William Benton, December 28, 1944, in the University of Chicago Press collection, box 230, folder 2, University of Chicago Library, Chicago, Ill.



5 Letter, Rudolf Carnap to Karl Popper, February 9, 1946, quoted in Mark Notturno, “Popper’s Critique of Scientific Socialism, or Carnap and His Co-Workers,” Philosophy of the Social Sciences, vol. 29, March 1999, p. 41. Given his comment, Carnap may have read A. R. Sweezy’s review in the November 5, 1944, issue of PM, a leftist outlet, where Hayek’s book was dubbed a “textbook for reactionaries.”



6 Readers of his preface to the 1976 edition, in this volume, will see that he amended some of these views in his later years.



7 This last task, evidently, is of necessity always specific to a time and place, with each new generation of readers taking away from it different lessons. As such, I will simply alert the reader that this introduction was written by an American historian of economic thought, and was last modified in late 2005.



8 F. A. Hayek, Prices and Production (London：Routledge and Sons, 1931). A Collected Works edition of the book is anticipated.



9 John Maynard Keynes, A Treatise on Money, 2 vols. [1930], reprinted as volumes 5 and 6 (1971) of The Collected Writings of John Maynard Keynes, ed. Austin Robinson and Donald Moggridge, 30 vols. (London：Macmillan [for the Royal Economic Society], 1971–89). Hayek’s exchanges with Keynes and Sraffa, including correspondence, is reproduced in Contra Keynes and Cambridge：Essays, Correspondence, ed. Bruce Caldwell, vol. 9 (1995) of The Collected Works of F. A. Hayek (Chicago：University of Chicago Press, and London：Routledge).



10 F. A. Hayek, “The Trend of Economic Thinking,” Economica, vol. 13, May 1933, pp. 121–37; reprinted as chapter 1 of The Trend of Economic Thinking：Essays on Political Economists and Economic History, ed. W. W. Bartley III and Stephen Kresge, vol. 3 (1991) of The Collected Works of F. A. Hayek, op. cit., pp. 17–34.



11 For more on the history of the two schools, see Bruce Caldwell, Hayek’s Challenge：An Intellectual Biography of F. A. Hayek (Chicago：University of Chicago Press, 2004), chapters 1–4.



12 This reminiscence is taken from a file card that was among a number that Hayek had written to provide information for Bill Bartley, who was to be Hayek’s biographer. (Bartley died in 1990 before getting very far along with the biography.) Transcriptions of the file cards are included in an unpublished document that Bartley playfully titled “Hayek Biography：‘Inductive Basis.’” Bartley was a philosopher trained in the Popperian tradition, and the “inductive basis” is a term in that tradition for the body of facts against which theories are tested. The quotation may be found on p. 78.



13 F. A. Hayek, Hayek on Hayek：An Autobiographical Dialogue, ed. Stephen Kresge and Leif Wenar (Chicago：University of Chicago Press, and London：Routledge, 1994), p. 102.



14 The original memorandum may be found in the Friedrich A. von Hayek Papers, box 105, folder 10, Hoover Institution Archives, Stanford, Calif.



A historiographical note：there is nothing on the “Nazi-Socialism” manuscript to indicate that it was written for Beveridge. And indeed, though I have long known of the existence of the manuscript in the Hayek archives, I assumed it was not the Beveridge memo because it carried a date of 1933, and, as noted, Hayek seemed to imply that he had given it to Beveridge in the late 1930s. In the summer of 2004, however, Susan Howson showed me a copy of the identical memo (though with a newly inscribed title and missing the date) that she had found in Beveridge’s papers. This is the basis for the claim that this was indeed the Beveridge memo.

As such, the 1939 date that Hayek mentions in his reminiscence appears simply to be an error. The two articles that grew out of the memo were published in 1938 and 1939, so the memo had to have been written before 1938. Furthermore, Beveridge left the LSE for Oxford in 1937, so presumably the date was even earlier. My best guess is that, in his reminiscence, Hayek simply confused the date of the 1939 publication with the date of the memo. I gratefully acknowledge an anonymous reader for the University of Chicago Press whose careful scrutiny of the evidence helped me to reach this conclusion.

15 F. A. Hayek, “Nazi-Socialism,” appendix.



16Ibid.



17 Both the 1938 and the 1939 versions of “Freedom and the Economic System” have been reprinted; they appear as chapters 8 and 9 in F. A. Hayek, Socialism and War：Essays, Documents and Reviews, ed. Bruce Caldwell, vol. 10 (1997) of The Collected Works of F. A. Hayek, op. cit., pp. 181–88, 189–211 respectively.



18 F. A. Hayek, “Freedom and the Economic System” [1938], op. cit., p. 182.



19Ibid., pp. 193–209.



20 F. A. Hayek, ed., Collectivist Economic Planning：Critical Studies on the Possibilities of Socialism (London：Routledge and Sons, 1935; reprinted, Clifton, NJ：Kelley, 1975).



21 Ludwig von Mises, “Economic Calculation in the Socialist Commonwealth,” translated by S. Adler, in F. A. Hayek, ed., Collectivist Economic Planning, op. cit., pp. 87–130.



22 F. A. Hayek, “The Present State of the Debate,” in Collectivist Economic Planning, op. cit., pp. 210–43. Hayek’s introductory essay, titled “The Nature and History of the Problem,” and his concluding essay are reprinted as chapters 1 and 2 of F. A. Hayek, Socialism and War, op. cit., pp. 53–79, 89–116, respectively. For more background on the debates, see the editor’s introduction to that volume.



23 Oskar Lange, “On the Economic Theory of Socialism,” in On the Economic Theory of Socialism, ed. Benjamin E. Lippincott (Minneapolis：University of Minnesota Press, 1938; reprinted, New York：McGraw Hill, 1956), pp. 57–143.



24 F. A. Hayek, “Socialist Calculation：The Competitive ‘Solution’” [1940], reprinted as chapter 3 of F. A. Hayek, Socialism and War, op. cit., pp. 117–40.



25 Both Dalton and Durbin served at various points as Labour members of parliament, and Dalton would hold the position of Chancellor of the Exchequer from 1945–47. We will encounter them again later in the introduction.



26 Sidney and Beatrice Webb, Soviet Communism：A New Civilization? 2 vols (London：Longmans, Green, 1935).



27 See, for example, Sir Daniel Hall and others, The Frustration of Science (London：Allen and Unwin, 1935; reprinted, New York：Arno Press, 1975); Findlay MacKenzie, ed., Planned Society：Yesterday, Today, Tomorrow. A Symposium by Thirty-Five Economists, Sociologists and Statesmen (New York：Prentice Hall, 1937); and Harold Macmillan, The Middle Way：A Study of the Problem of Economic and Social Progress in a Free and Democratic Society (London：Macmillan, 1938). The climate of opinion among the British intelligentsia in the interwar years is reviewed in Bruce Caldwell, Hayek’s Challenge, op. cit., pp. 232–37.



28 Lionel Robbins, Economic Planning and Economic Order (London：Macmillan, 1937), p. 3.



29 For more on this see the editor’s introduction to F. A. Hayek, The Pure Theory of Capital, ed. Lawrence A. White, vol. 12 (forthcoming) of The Collected Works of F. A. Hayek, op. cit.



30 Letter, F. A. Hayek to Fritz Machlup, August 27, 1939, Fritz Machlup Papers, box 43, folder 15, Hoover Institution Archives. A classmate of Hayek’s at the University of Vienna, Machlup (1902–83) went to the United States on a Rockefeller Fellowship in 1933. As the situation in Europe deteriorated Machlup, a Jew, decided to stay in the States, taking a position in 1935 at the University of Buffalo in New York. When the United States entered the war he went to Washington to work at the Office of Alien Property Custodian. Hayek and Machlup corresponded frequently, and this allows us to follow Hayek’s activities during the war years very closely. We will see that Machlup also played an important role in helping to find an American publisher for Hayek.



31 F. A. Hayek, “Some Notes on Propaganda in Germany,” p. 2. The memo, which is nine pages long and bears the notation “2nd draft, 12/9/39,” may be found in the Hayek Papers, box 61, folder 4, Hoover Institution Archives. Box 61, folder 5 contains Hayek’s letter to the director general, dated September 9, 1939, as well as Major Anthony Gishford’s letter of December 30.



32 Letter, F. A. Hayek to Fritz Machlup, June 21, 1940, Machlup Papers, box 43, folder 15, Hoover Institution Archives.



33Ibid.



34 These would be published separately as “The Counter-Revolution of Science,” Economica, N.S., vol. 8, February 1941, pp. 9–36; May 1941, pp. 119–50; August 1941, pp. 281–320; and “Scientism and the Study of Society,” Economica, N.S., vol. 9, August 1942, pp. 267–91; vol. 10, February 1943, pp. 34–63; vol. 11, February 1944, pp. 27–39. Revised versions of these essays may be found in F. A. Hayek, The Counter-Revolution of Science (Glencoe, IL：The Free Press, 1952; reprinted, Indianapolis, IN：Liberty Press, 1979).



35 Letter, F. A. Hayek to Fritz Machlup, January 2, 1941, Machlup Papers, box 43, folder 15, Hoover Institution Archives.



36 For more on Neurath, see the editor’s introduction to F. A. Hayek, Socialism and War, op. cit. There was a brief but fascinating correspondence between Hayek and Neurath at the end of the Second World War. Neurath initiated it by sending Hayek a review of The Road to Serfdom, and in a subsequent letter invited him to debate. Hayek put him off, saying he was busy working on a writing project. This would later become The Sensory Order：An Inquiry into the Foundations of Theoretical Psychology (Chicago：University of Chicago Press, 1952). The debate never took place, as Neurath died in December 1945. The correspondence may be found in the Hayek Papers, box 40, folder 7, Hoover Institution Archives.



37 Editorial, “Science and the National War Effort,” Nature, vol. 146, October 12, 1940, p. 470.



38 Barbara Wootton, “Book Review：Marxism：A Post-Mortem,” Nature, vol. 146, October 19, 1940, p. 508.



39 National Executive Committee of the Labour Party, The Old World and the New Society：A Report on the Problems of War and Peace Reconstruction (London：Transport House, n.d.), pp. 3–4. The pamphlet was issued by the Committee “for the consideration of its various Affiliated Organizations prior to discussions at a series of Regional Conferences throughout the country, and at the Annual Conference of the Party, to be held in London at Whitsuntide (May 25–28, 1942).”



40 Professor H. J. Laski, “A Planned Economic Democracy,” The Labour Party Report of the 41st Annual Conference (London：Transport House, 1942), p. 111.



41 Though as William Beveridge’s biographer notes, “Already by June 1941 . . . there was a large body of reforming opinion interested in, and with well-formed views upon, the range of problems that Beveridge and his committee were to examine in detail over the next eighteen months.” See Jose Harris, William Beveridge：A Biography, revised paperback edition (Oxford：Clarendon Press, 1997), pp. 367–68.



42 Brian Abel-Smith, “The Beveridge Report：Its Origins and Outcomes,” in Beveridge and Social Security：An International Perspective, ed. John Hill, John Ditch, and Howard Glennerster (Oxford：Clarendon Press, 1994), p. 14.



43 Janet Beveridge, Beveridge and His Plan (London：Hodder and Stoughton, 1954), p. 114. It should probably be pointed out that it was Beveridge’s wife who reported on the length of the line, and she was apparently recounting an anecdote that she had received second hand.



44 Brian Abel-Smith, “The Beveridge Report,” op. cit., p. 18.



45 According to Beveridge’s biographer, “the Social Insurance plan formed merely an iceberg tip—and in Beveridge’s view perhaps the least important tip—of the very much more ambitious and far-reaching program of social reconstruction that he had in his mind at the time . . . [which] included such possible objectives as the nationalization of land and housing, national minimum wage legislation, public ownership of up to 75 per cent of industrial production, a public enterprise board to direct both public and private investment, and permanent state control of income, prices, and manpower planning.” See Jose Harris, “Beveridge’s Social and Political Thought,” in Beveridge and Social Security, op. cit., p. 29. The changes instituted by the postwar Labour government would be far less dramatic than what Beveridge privately hoped for, and the levels of assistance once implemented were less than what he outlined in his report. But the welfare state was established, and with it the presumption that the state would be responsible for, and capable of, maintaining “full employment.”



46 Sir William Beveridge, Social Insurance and Allied Services (New York：Macmillan, 1942), p. 6.



47 Letter, Fritz Machlup to F. A. Hayek, October 23, 1942, Hayek Papers, box 36, folder 17, Hoover Institution Archives, copyright Stanford University.



48 In a letter dated June 13, 1943, Hayek reported that he had sent Machlup copies of chapters 13 and 14 “about two months ago” and was now sending him the final chapter (chapter 15) as well as a new preface and table of contents. Machlup confirmed their arrival in his letter of August 9, 1943. Both letters may be found in the Machlup Papers, box 43, folder 15, Hoover Institution Archives. It should perhaps be noted that there are sixteen, not fifteen, chapters in the final published version, but the last chapter is only a two-page conclusion that was added later.



49 Machlup was an editorial consultant for the academic publishing house Blakiston Company, and they told him that they would be happy to publish the book should Hayek want to, but lacking a trade department they would not be able to provide any real marketing for the book. So Machlup decided to see if he could drum up interest elsewhere.



50 Letter, Fritz Machlup to F. A. Hayek, January 21, 1943, Machlup Papers, box 43, folder 15, Hoover Institution Archives, copyright Stanford University. It is difficult to resist adding the sentence with which Machlup’s correspondent, Mr. Putnam, ended his paragraph：“If, however, the book is published by someone else and becomes a best-seller in the non-fiction field, just put it down to one of those mistakes in judgment which we all make.” Indeed.



51 Letter, Fritz Machlup to Harry Gideonse, September 9, 1943, Machlup Papers, box 43, folder 15, Hoover Institution Archives, copyright Stanford University.



52 Letter, Ordway Tead to Fritz Machlup, September 25, 1943, Machlup Papers, box 43, folder 15, Hoover Institution Archives. Tead added that “Also, it is so completely in the negative vein as to leave the reader without any clue as to what line to take in thought or policy,” a complaint others would echo.



53 Aaron Director (1901–2004) did his graduate work in economics at Chicago, and taught there briefly before leaving for a job at the Treasury Department in 1933. He also spent some time in the 1930s at the LSE, where he met Hayek. In 1946 Director joined the Law School faculty at Chicago, and helped found the law and economics movement during his tenure there. His sister, Rose, married Milton Friedman.



54 As Press editor John Scoon recounted in a letter dated May 2, 1945, to C. Hartley Grattan, “The idea of the Press’s publishing it in this country was suggested by a member of the Department of Economics at the University who had previously known Hayek and his work; almost simultaneously another friend of the author’s, once at the University but then in Washington with the government, suggested the book to us and got us the page proofs.” Scoon’s letter may be found in the University of Chicago Press collection, box 230, folder 3, University of Chicago Library. Scoon and Press director Joseph Brandt both joined the Press in January 1944, so Scoon’s account of the process by which the book came to Chicago is second hand. Nonetheless, his letter is filled with interesting information (Milton Friedman also made use of parts of it in his “Note on Publishing History”), and it is published for the first time in the appendix.



55 Frank Knight, reader’s report, December 10, 1943, University of Chicago Press collection, box 230, folder 1, University of Chicago Library. The report is published for the first time in the appendix.



56 Jacob Marschak, reader’s report, December 20, 1943, University of Chicago Press collection, box 230, folder 1, University of Chicago Library. The report is published for the first time in the appendix.



57 See Hayek’s letter to Machlup, February 2, 1944, Machlup Papers, box 43, folder 15, Hoover Institution Archives.



58 As noted in the editorial foreword, the text of the American edition serves as the basis for the present edition.



59 In a letter dated June 26, 1944, Hayek explained to editor Scoon why the quotations were so important：“The whole tone of the chapter is sometimes determined by the fact that the main idea is summarized in the quotation at the head, and I sometimes deliberately omit to state a main conclusion because it is expressed in the quotation. I should it regard as a major calamity to the book if they have really to be omitted. . . .” The letter may be found in the University of Chicago Press collection, box 230, folder 1, University of Chicago Library.



60 An editorial anecdote：the book is filled with quotations of others, and unfortunately, Hayek often failed to get the quotations exactly right, even those at the head of his chapters. In a letter dated February 26, 1944, Hayek asked Machlup to correct one of his quotes, Acton’s famous line, “Power tends to corrupt, and absolute power corrupts absolutely.” Unfortunately, even in his correction Hayek got it wrong, telling Machlup it should read, “Power tends to corrupt, and absolute power tends to corrupt absolutely”! Machlup dutifully passed the “correction” on, but presumably the actual quote was sufficiently famous that the Chicago Press copyeditor caught the error, for the correct phrasing appeared in the book. The letter is found in the Machlup Papers, box 43, folder 15, Hoover Institution Archives.



61 As Jeremy Shearmur, “Hayek, The Road to Serfdom, and the British Conservative Party,” Journal of the History of Economic Thought, forthcoming, reports, an abridged British edition was published by Routledge using paper that had been transferred from the allocation provided to the British Conservative Party. The abridgement was done by a conservative MP, Commander Archibald James, and in the place of the title page quotations from Hume and Tocqueville, the abridged edition carried a quotation from Winston Churchill, the leader of the Conservative Party!



62 F. A. Hayek, The Road to Serfdom (Sydney：Dymock’s Book Arcade, Ltd., 1944).



63 For more details on the early history of its publication in America, see John Scoon’s letter of May 2, 1945 to C. Hartley Grattan, which is reprinted in the appendix.



64 Hayek mentioned Eastman, who was initially sympathetic to the Russian Revolution but subsequently recanted, in chapter 2, p. 79. Cf. the foreword to the 1956 American paperback edition, this volume, p. 41.



65Reader’s Digest provided its circulation figures for 1945. Croswell Bowen, “How Big Business Raised the Battle Cry of ‘Serfdom,’” PM, Sunday, October 14, 1945, p. 13, estimated the Reader’s Digest readership at 10 million, and is also the source for the Book-of-the-Month Club reprint figure. (Newsstand sales may account for the discrepancy between the circulation and readership figures for the Reader’s Digest.) In his “Note on Publishing History” Milton Friedman estimated the reprint figure as 600,000 (rather than “more than one million”), but this was probably based on John Scoon’s identical estimate in his letter of May 2, 1945. The number presumably had grown between May and October when Bowen’s article appeared.



66 Hayek recounts the story of his trip in more detail in Hayek on Hayek, op. cit., pp. 103–5.



67 Both the Reader’s Digest condensation and the cartoon version from Look are reprinted in a pamphlet released by the Institute of Economic Affairs：F. A. Hayek, Reader’s Digest Condensed Version of The Road to Serfdom, Rediscovered Riches no. 5 (London：IEA Health and Welfare Unit, 1999). The Director of the IEA John Blundell reported to me on February 25, 2005, that in the last year there had been over 40,000 downloads from their website of a PDF containing the text of the condensed version of The Road to Serfdom.



68 F. A. Hayek, “Planning and ‘The Road to Serfdom’：Friedrich Hayek Comments on Uses to Which His Book Has Been Put,” Chicago Sun Book Week, May 6, 1945.



69 F. A. Hayek, “The Road to Serfdom, an Address before the Economic Club of Detroit,” April 23, 1945, p. 6. A transcript of the address may be found in the Hayek Papers, box 106, folder 8, Hoover Institution Archives.



70 Marquis W. Childs, “Apostle Hot Potato：Austrian for Whom Senator Hawkes Gave Party Embarrassed Republicans,” Newark Evening News, May 6, 1945.



71 This is from the closing sentence of the Society’s “Statement of Aims,” adopted April 10, 1947, and reproduced in Fritz Machlup, ed., Essays on Hayek (New York：New York University Press, 1976), p. xiii.



72 As Hayek later recounted in Hayek on Hayek, op. cit., p. 103, “practically all my contacts that led to later visits and finally made my move to Chicago possible were made during this trip.”



73 In a letter to Machlup dated March 20, 1944, Hayek noted with some surprise the initial warm reception the book had received in the British press, then added, “But I hope the attacks will begin soon.” The letter may be found in the Machlup Papers, box 43, folder 15, Hoover Institution Archives.



74 See the foreword to the 1956 American paperback edition, this volume, p. 40.



75 During the 1945 election both Clement Atlee and Hugh Dalton, soon to be the Labour Prime Minister and Chancellor of the Exchequer, respectively, accused Winston Churchill of getting his ideas from Friedrich August von (with an emphasis on the “von”) Hayek. In one speech (later dubbed the “Gestapo” speech), Churchill had predicted that a Labour victory would lead to a severe restriction on individual liberties. For more on all this see F. A. Hayek, Hayek on Hayek, op. cit., pp. 106–7; cf. Jeremy Shearmur, “Hayek, The Road to Serfdom, and the British Conservative Party,” op. cit.



76 Herman Finer, Road to Reaction (Boston：Little, Brown and Company, 1945), p. ix.



77Ibid., p. 36. It is true that Hayek believed that constitutional limits were essential for protecting individuals against the “tyranny of the majority.” But he was an opponent of planning, not of democracy. And indeed, if his arguments are correct, democracy is much more likely to be preserved under liberal political and economic institutions than under planning, whatever form it might take.



78Ibid., p. 210.



79 George Soule, “The Gospel according to Hazlitt：A Review of Economics in One Lesson,” The New Republic, vol. 115, August 19, 1946, p. 202.



80 Croswell Bowen, “How Big Business . . . ,” op. cit., p. 16.



81 F. A. Hayek, “Postscript,” Hayek Papers, box 106, folder 8, Hoover Institution Archives.



82 See the foreword to the 1956 American paperback edition, this volume, pp. 41–42. A perusal of the 1948 “postscript” shows that Hayek’s initial response was less measured, and apparently even in 1955 the penultimate draft of the “Foreword” contained some lines about Rexford Tugwell and Wesley Clair Mitchell that prompted concern from an editor at the Press. These lines were dropped from the final version. See Alexander Morin’s letter to Hayek of August 18, 1955, University of Chicago Press collection, box 230, folder 4, University of Chicago Library.



83 See John Blundell, “Introduction：Hayek, Fisher and The Road to Serfdom,” in F. A. Hayek, Reader’s Digest Condensed Version of The Road to Serfdom, op. cit., pp. 16–25.



84 John Scoon to C. Hartley Grattan, May 2, 1945, op. cit., reprinted in the appendix.



85 Alvin Hansen, “The New Crusade against Planning,” The New Republic, vol. 112, January 1, 1945, pp. 9–10.



86 Letter, John Maynard Keynes to Hayek, June 28, 1944, reprinted in John Maynard Keynes, Activities 1940–1946. Shaping the Post-War World：Employment and Commodities, ed. Donald Moggridge, vol. 27 (1980) of The Collected Writings of John Maynard Keynes, op. cit., p. 385.



87Ibid., p. 386.



88 F. A. Hayek, The Constitution of Liberty (Chicago：University of Chicago Press, 1960).



89 F. A. Hayek, Law, Legislation, and Liberty, 3 vols. (Chicago：University of Chicago Press, 1973–79).



90 Evan Durbin, “Professor Hayek on Economic Planning and Political Liberty,” Economic Journal, vol. 55, December 1945, p. 360. Durbin had his own book on democratic socialism：see Evan Durbin, The Politics of Democratic Socialism：An Essay on Social Policy (London：Routledge, 1940; reprinted, New York：Kelley, 1969).



91Ibid., p. 361.



92 F. A. Hayek, “Socialist Calculation：The Competitive ‘Solution,’” op. cit. Hayek mentions the review in chapter 3, note 4.



93Ibid., p. 123.



94 Letter, Oskar Lange to Hayek, July 31, 1940, reprinted in Economic Theory and Market Socialism— Selected Essays of Oskar Lange, ed. Tadeusz Kowalik (Cheltenham：Elgar, 1994), p. 298.



95 F. A. Hayek, “Postscript,” Hayek Papers, box 106, folder 8, Hoover Institution Archives. By this point Durbin was a Labour MP and the Parliamentary Secretary of the Ministry of Works.



96 Tadeusz Kowalik, “Oskar Lange’s Market Socialism：The Story of an Intellectual-Political Career” [1991], reprinted in Why Market Socialism? Voices from Dissent, ed. Frank Roosevelt and David Belkin (Armonk, New York：M. E. Sharpe, 1994), pp. 137–54.



97 See Bruce Caldwell, “Hayek and Socialism,” Journal of Economic Literature, vol. 35, December 1997, pp. 1856–90, for more on the recent debates.



98 Durbin, op. cit., p. 360. Durbin repeatedly accused Hayek as being either unscientific or hostile to science in his review, nicely exemplifying the positivist worldview against which Hayek so often fought.



99 See Barbara Wootton, Freedom under Planning, op. cit., pp. 28, 36–37, 50, and George Stigler, Memoirs of an Unregulated Economist (New York：Basic Books, 1985), p. 146.



100 Paul Samuelson, Economics, 11th ed. (New York：McGraw-Hill, 1980), p. 827.



101 F. A. Hayek, preface to the 1976 edition, this volume, p. 55. Note that Hayek says “this is not what the book says.” He may have been implying here that the condensation and cartoon versions of his argument were at least in part responsible for the widespread misreading of his message. And indeed, in the condensed version Hayek’s insistence that he is not describing inevitable tendencies is left out, whereas part of the following sentence, not emphasized in the original, is set in italics：“Few recognize that the rise of fascism and naziism [the IEA version mistakenly replaces naziism with Marxism here] was not a reaction against the socialist trends of the preceding period but a necessary outcome of those tendencies.” See F. A. Hayek, Reader’s Digest Condensed Version of The Road to Serfdom, op. cit., pp. 31–32.



102 Letter, Hayek to Paul Samuelson, December 18, 1980, Hayek Papers, box 48, folder 5, Hoover Institution Archives. Hayek was wrong to imply that Samuelson was the source of the misreading, for it was a common one. The archives also contain Samuelson’s reply, in which he apologized and promised to try to represent Hayek’s views more accurately in any future work.



103 F. A. Hayek, “The Road to Serfdom, an Address before the Economic Club of Detroit,” op. cit., p. 4.



104 This volume, chapter 10, p. 159.



105 F. A. Hayek, “Freedom and the Economic System” [1939], op. cit., p. 205. When I have described Hayek’s argument in seminars, more than once members of the audience have noted its similarities with Arrow’s “Impossibility Theorem” in welfare economics.



106 See F. A. Hayek, preface to the 1976 edition, this volume, p. 53.



107 I thank Steven Horwitz for providing these apposite examples in his contributions to a session commemorating the 60th anniversary of the publication of The Road to Serfdom held at the 2004 History of Economics Society meetings in Toronto, Canada.



108 For many depressing examples of Hayek’s thesis, see Robert Higgs, Crisis and Leviathan：Critical Episodes in the Growth of American Government (New York：Oxford University Press, 1987). This introduction is being written during George W. Bush’s presidency, one that provides plentiful additional evidence.



109 John Maynard Keynes, The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money [1936], reprinted as vol. 7 (1973) of The Collected Writings of John Maynard Keynes, op. cit., p. 383.





THE ROAD TO SERFDOM





It is seldom that liberty of any kind is lost all at once.

—David Hume





I should have loved freedom, I believe, at all times, but in the time in which we live I am ready to worship it.

—A. de Tocqueville





To the socialists of all parties





PREFACE TO THE ORIGINAL EDITIONS1



When a professional student of social affairs writes a political book, his first duty is plainly to say so. This is a political book. I do not wish to disguise this by describing it, as I might perhaps have done, by the more elegant and ambitious name of an essay in social philosophy. But, whatever the name, the essential point remains that all I shall have to say is derived from certain ultimate values. I hope I have adequately discharged in the book itself a second and no less important duty：to make it clear beyond doubt what these ultimate values are on which the whole argument depends.



There is, however, one thing I want to add to this. Though this is a political book, I am as certain as anyone can be that the beliefs set out in it are not determined by my personal interests. I can discover no reason why the kind of society which seems to me desirable should offer greater advantages to me than to the great majority of the people of my country. In fact, I am always told by my socialist colleagues that as an economist I should occupy a much more important position in the kind of society to which I am opposed—provided, of course, that I could bring myself to accept their views. I feel equally certain that my opposition to these views is not due to their being different from those with which I have grown up, since they are the very views which I held as a young man and which have led me to make the study of economics my profession. For those who, in the current fashion, seek interested motives in every profession of a political opinion, I may, perhaps, be allowed to add that I have every possible reason for not writing or publishing this book. It is certain to offend many people with whom I wish to live on friendly terms; it has forced me to put aside work for which I feel better qualified and to which I attach greater importance in the long run; and, above all, it is certain to prejudice the reception of the results of the more strictly academic work to which all my inclinations lead me.



If in spite of this I have come to regard the writing of this book as a duty which I must not evade, this was mainly due to a peculiar and serious feature of the discussions of problems of future economic policy at the present time, of which the public is scarcely sufficiently aware. This is the fact that the majority of economists have now for some years been absorbed by the war machine, and silenced by their official positions, and that in consequence public opinion on these problems is to an alarming extent guided by amateurs and cranks, by people who have an ax to grind or a pet panacea to sell. In these circumstances one who still has the leisure for literary work is hardly entitled to keep to himself apprehensions which current tendencies must create in the minds of many who cannot publicly express them—though in different circumstances I should have gladly left the discussion of questions of national policy to those who are both better authorized and better qualified for the task.



The central argument of this book was first sketched in an article entitled “Freedom and the Economic System,” which appeared in the Contemporary Review for April, 1938, and was later reprinted in an enlarged form as one of the “Public Policy Pamphlets” edited by Professor H. D. Gideonse for the University of Chicago Press (1939).2 I have to thank the editors and publishers of both these publications for permission to reproduce certain passages from them.



F. A. Hayek

1 [This preface appeared in the British, Australian, and American editions. —Ed.]



2 [F. A. Hayek, “Freedom and the Economic System,” Contemporary Review, April 1938, pp. 434– 42; reprinted as chapter 8 of F. A. Hayek, Socialism and War：Essays, Documents, Reviews, op. cit., pp. 181–88. F. A. Hayek, Freedom and the Economic System (Chicago：University of Chicago Press, 1939), Public Policy Pamphlet No. 29 in the series edited by Harry D. Gideonse; reprinted as chapter 9 ibid., pp. 189–211. —Ed.]





FOREWORD TO THE 1956　

AMERICAN PAPERBACK EDITION



Although this book might in some respects have been different if I had written it in the first instance with American readers primarily in mind, it has by now made for itself too definite if unexpected a place in this country to make any rewriting advisable. Its republication in a new form, however, more than ten years after its first appearance, is perhaps an appropriate occasion for explaining its original aim and for a few comments on the altogether unforeseen and in many ways curious success it has had in this country.



The book was written in England during the war years and was designed almost exclusively for English readers. Indeed, it was addressed mainly to a very special class of readers in England. It was in no spirit of mockery that I dedicated it “To the Socialists of All Parties.” It had its origin in many discussions which, during the preceding ten years, I had with friends and colleagues whose sympathies had been inclined toward the left, and it was in continuation of those arguments that I wrote The Road to Serfdom.



When Hitler came into power in Germany, I had already been teaching at the University of London for several years, but I kept in close touch with affairs on the Continent and was able to do so until the outbreak of war.1 What I had thus seen of the origins and evolution of the various totalitarian movements made me feel that English public opinion, particularly among my friends who held “advanced” views on social matters, completely misconceived the nature of those movements. Even before the war I was led by this to state in a brief essay what became the central argument of this book.2 But after war broke out I felt that this widespread misunderstanding of the political systems of our enemies, and soon also of our new ally, Russia, constituted a serious danger which had to be met by a more systematic effort. Also, it was already fairly obvious that England herself was likely to experiment after the war with the same kind of policies which I was convinced had contributed so much to destroy liberty elsewhere.



Thus this book gradually took shape as a warning to the socialist intelligentsia of England; with the inevitable delays of wartime production, it finally appeared there early in the spring of 1944. This date will, incidentally, also explain why I felt that in order to get a hearing I had somewhat to restrain myself in my comments on the regime of our wartime ally3 and to choose my illustrations mainly from developments in Germany.



It seems that the book appeared at a propitious moment, and I can feel only gratification at the success it had in England, which, though very different in kind, was quantitatively no smaller than it was to be in the United States. On the whole, the book was taken in the spirit in which it was written, and its argument was seriously examined by those to whom it was mainly addressed. Excepting only certain of the leading politicians of the Labour party—who, as if to provide an illustration for my remarks on the nationalist tendencies of socialism, attacked the book on the ground that it was written by a foreigner4 — the thoughtful and receptive manner in which it was generally examined by persons who must have found its conclusions running counter to their strongest convictions was deeply impressive.5 The same applies also to the other European countries where the book eventually appeared; and its particularly cordial reception by the post-Nazi generation of Germany, when copies of a translation published in Switzerland at last reached that country, was one of the unforeseen pleasures I derived from its publication.



Rather different was the reception the book had in the United States when it was published here a few months after its appearance in England. I had given little thought to its possible appeal to American readers when writing it. It was then twenty years since I had last been in America as a research student, and during that time I had somewhat lost touch with the development of American ideas.6 I could not be sure how far my argument had direct relevance to the American scene, and I was not in the least surprised when the book was in fact rejected by the first three publishing houses approached.7 It was certainly most unexpected when, after the book was brought out by its present publishers, it soon began to sell at a rate almost unprecedented for a book of this kind, not intended for popular consumption.8 And I was even more surprised by the violence of the reaction from both political wings, by the lavish praise the book received from some quarters no less than by the passionate hatred it appeared to arouse in others.



Contrary to my experience in England, in America the kind of people to whom this book was mainly addressed seem to have rejected it out of hand as a malicious and disingenuous attack on their finest ideals; they appear never to have paused to examine its argument. The language used and the emotion shown in some of the more adverse criticism the book received were indeed rather extraordinary.9 But scarcely less surprising to me was the enthusiastic welcome accorded to the book by many whom I never expected to read a volume of this type—and from many more of whom I still doubt whether in fact they ever read it. And I must add that occasionally the manner in which it was used vividly brought home to me the truth of Lord Acton’s observation that “at all times sincere friends of freedom have been rare, and its triumphs have been due to minorities, that have prevailed by associating themselves with auxiliaries whose objects often differed from their own; and this association, which is always dangerous, has sometimes been disastrous.”10



It seems hardly likely that this extraordinary difference in the reception of the book on the two sides of the Atlantic is due entirely to a difference in national temperament. I have since become increasingly convinced that the explanation must lie in a difference of intellectual situation at the time when it arrived. In England, and in Europe generally, the problems with which I dealt had long ceased to be abstract questions. The ideals which I examined had long before come down to earth, and even their most enthusiastic adherents had already seen concretely some of the difficulties and unlooked-for results which their application produced. I was thus writing about phenomena of which almost all my European readers had some more or less close experience, and I was merely arguing systematically and consistently what many had already intuitively felt. There was already a disillusionment about these ideals under way, which their critical examination merely made more vocal or explicit.



In the United States, on the other hand, these ideals were still fresh and more virulent. It was only ten or fifteen years earlier—not forty or fifty, as in England—that a large part of the intelligentsia had caught the infection. And, in spite of the experimentation of the New Deal, their enthusiasm for the new kind of rationally constructed society was still largely unsoiled by practical experience. What to most Europeans had in some measure become vieux jeux was to the American radicals still the glittering hope of a better world which they had embraced and nourished during the recent years of the Great Depression.



Opinion moves fast in the United States, and even now it is difficult to remember how comparatively short a time it was before The Road to Serfdom appeared that the most extreme kind of economic planning had been seriously advocated and the model of Russia held up for imitation by men who were soon to play an important role in public affairs. It would be easy enough to give chapter and verse for this, but it would be invidious now to single out individuals. Be it enough to mention that in 1934 the newly established National Planning Board11 devoted a good deal of attention to the example of planning provided by these four countries：Germany, Italy, Russia, and Japan. Ten years later we had of course learned to refer to these same countries as “totalitarian,” had fought a long war with three of them, and were soon to start a “cold war” with the fourth. Yet the contention of this book that the political development in those countries had something to do with their economic policies was then still indignantly rejected by the advocates of planning in this country. It suddenly became the fashion to deny that the inspiration of planning had come from Russia and to contend, as one of my eminent critics put it, that it was “a plain fact that Italy, Russia, Japan, and Germany all reached totalitarianism by very different roads.”12



The whole intellectual climate in the United States at the time The Road to Serfdom appeared was thus one in which it was bound either profoundly to shock or greatly to delight the members of sharply divided groups. In consequence, in spite of its apparent success, the book has not had here the kind of effect I should have wished or which it has had elsewhere. It is true that its main conclusions are today widely accepted. If twelve years ago it seemed to many almost sacrilege to suggest that fascism and communism are merely variants of the same totalitarianism which central control of all economic activity tends to produce, this has become almost a commonplace. It is now even widely recognized that democratic socialism is a very precarious and unstable affair, riven with internal contradictions and everywhere producing results most distasteful to many of its advocates.



For this sobered mood the lessons of events and more popular discussions of the problem13 are certainly more responsible than this book. Nor was my general thesis as such original when it was published. Although similar but earlier warnings may have been largely forgotten, the dangers inherent in the policies which I criticized had been pointed out again and again. Whatever merits this book possesses consist not in the reiteration of this thesis but in the patient and detailed examination of the reasons why economic planning will produce such unlooked-for results and of the process by which they come about.



It is for this reason that I rather hope that the time may now be more favorable in America for a serious consideration of the true argument of the book than it was when it first appeared. I believe that what is important in it still has to render its service, although I recognize that the hot socialism against which it was mainly directed—that organized movement toward a deliberate organization of economic life by the state as the chief owner of the means of production— is nearly dead in the Western world. The century of socialism in this sense probably came to an end around 1948. Many of its illusions have been discarded even by its leaders, and elsewhere as well as in the United States the very name has lost much of its attraction. Attempts will no doubt be made to rescue the name for movements which are less dogmatic, less doctrinaire, and less systematic. But an argument applicable solely against those clear-cut conceptions of social reform which characterized the socialist movements of the past might today well appear as tilting against windmills.



Yet though hot socialism is probably a thing of the past, some of its conceptions have penetrated far too deeply into the whole structure of current thought to justify complacency. If few people in the Western world now want to remake society from the bottom according to some ideal blueprint, a great many still believe in measures which, though not designed completely to remodel the economy, in their aggregate effect may well unintentionally produce this result. And, even more than at the time when I wrote this book, the advocacy of policies which in the long run cannot be reconciled with the preservation of a free society is no longer a party matter. That hodgepodge of ill-assembled and often inconsistent ideals which under the name of the Welfare State has largely replaced socialism as the goal of the reformers needs very careful sorting out if its results are not to be very similar to those of full-fledged socialism. This is not to say that some of its aims are not both practicable and laudable. But there are many ways in which we can work toward the same goal, and in the present state of opinion there is some danger that our impatience for quick results may lead us to choose instruments which, though perhaps more efficient for achieving the particular ends, are not compatible with the preservation of a free society. The increasing tendency to rely on administrative coercion and discrimination where a modification of the general rules of law might, perhaps more slowly, achieve the same object, and to resort to direct state controls or to the creation of monopolistic institutions where judicious use of financial inducements might evoke spontaneous efforts, is still a powerful legacy of the socialist period which is likely to influence policy for a long time to come.



Just because in the years ahead of us political ideology is not likely to aim at a clearly defined goal but toward piecemeal change, a full understanding of the process through which certain kinds of measures can destroy the bases of an economy based on the market and gradually smother the creative powers of a free civilization seems now of the greatest importance. Only if we understand why and how certain kinds of economic controls tend to paralyze the driving forces of a free society, and which kinds of measures are particularly dangerous in this respect, can we hope that social experimentation will not lead us into situations none of us want.



It is as a contribution to this task that this book is intended. I hope that at least in the quieter atmosphere of the present it will be received as what it was meant to be, not as an exhortation to resistance against any improvement or experimentation, but as a warning that we should insist that any modification in our arrangements should pass certain tests (described in the central chapter on the Rule of Law) before we commit ourselves to courses from which withdrawal may be difficult.



The fact that this book was originally written with only the British public in mind does not appear to have seriously affected its intelligibility for the American reader. But there is one point of phraseology which I ought to explain here to forestall any misunderstanding. I use throughout the term “liberal” in the original, nineteenth-century sense in which it is still current in Britain. In current American usage it often means very nearly the opposite of this. It has been part of the camouflage of leftish movements in this country, helped by the muddleheadedness of many who really believe in liberty, that “liberal” has come to mean the advocacy of almost every kind of government control. I am still puzzled why those in the United States who truly believe in liberty should not only have allowed the left to appropriate this almost indispensable term but should even have assisted by beginning to use it themselves as a term of opprobrium. This seems to be particularly regrettable because of the consequent tendency of many true liberals to describe themselves as conservatives.



It is true, of course, that in the struggle against the believers in the all-powerful state the true liberal must sometimes make common cause with the conservative, and in some circumstances, as in contemporary Britain, he has hardly any other way of actively working for his ideals. But true liberalism is still distinct from conservatism, and there is danger in the two being confused.14 Conservatism, though a necessary element in any stable society, is not a social program; in its paternalistic, nationalistic, and power-adoring tendencies it is often closer to socialism than true liberalism; and with its traditionalistic, anti-intellectual, and often mystical propensities it will never, except in short periods of disillusionment, appeal to the young and all those others who believe that some changes are desirable if this world is to become a better place. A conservative movement, by its very nature, is bound to be a defender of established privilege and to lean on the power of government for the protection of privilege. The essence of the liberal position, however, is the denial of all privilege, if privilege is understood in its proper and original meaning of the state granting and protecting rights to some which are not available on equal terms to others.



Perhaps a further word of apology is required for my allowing this book to reappear in entirely unchanged form after the lapse of almost twelve years. I have many times tried to revise it, and there are numerous points I should like to explain at greater length or to state more cautiously or to fortify by more illustration and proof. But all attempts at rewriting only proved that I could never again produce as short a book covering as much of the field; and it seems to me that, whatever other merits it may have, its relative brevity is its greatest. I have thus been forced to the conclusion that whatever I want to add to the argument I must attempt in separate studies. I have begun to do so in various essays, some of which provide a more searching discussion of certain philosophical and economic issues on which the present book only touches.15 On the special question of the roots of the ideas here criticized and of their connection with some of the most powerful and impressive intellectual movements of this age, I have commented in another volume.16 And before long I hope to supplement the all-too-brief central chapter of this book by a more extensive treatment of the relation between equality and justice.17



There is one particular topic, however, on which the reader will with justice expect me to comment on this occasion, yet which I could even less treat adequately without writing a new book. Little more than a year after The Road to Serfdom first appeared, Great Britain had a socialist government which remained in power for six years. And the question of how far this experience has confirmed or refuted my apprehensions is one which I must try to answer at least briefly. If anything, this experience has strengthened my concern and, I believe I may add, has taught the reality of the difficulties I pointed out to many for whom an abstract argument would never have carried conviction. Indeed, it was not long after the Labour government came into power that some of the issues which my critics in America dismissed as bogeys became in Great Britain main topics of political discussion. Soon even official documents were gravely discussing the danger of totalitarianism raised by the policy of economic planning. There is no better illustration of the manner in which the inherent logic of their policies drove an unwilling socialist government into the kind of coercion it disliked than the following passage in the Economic Survey for 1947 (which the Prime Minister presented to Parliament in February of that year) and its sequel:



There is an essential difference between totalitarian and democratic planning. The former subordinates all individual desires and preferences to the demand of the State. For this purpose, it uses various methods of compulsion upon the individual which deprive him of his freedom of choice. Such methods may be necessary even in a democratic country during the extreme emergency of a great war. Thus the British people gave their war time Government the power to direct labour. But in normal times the people of a democratic country will not give up their freedom of choice to their Government. A democratic Government must therefore conduct its economic planning in a manner which preserves the maximum possible freedom of choice to the individual citizen.18



The interesting point about this profession of laudable intentions is that six months later the same government found itself in peacetime forced to put the conscription of labor back on the statute book.19 It hardly diminishes the significance of this when it is pointed out that the power was in fact never used because, if it is known that the authorities have power to coerce, few will wait for actual coercion. But it is rather difficult to see how the government could have persisted in its illusions when in the same document it claims that it was now for “the Government to say what is the best use for the resources in the national interest” and to “lay down the economic task for the nation：it must say which things are the most important and what the objectives of policy ought to be.”20



Of course, six years of socialist government in England have not produced anything resembling a totalitarian state. But those who argue that this has disproved the thesis of The Road to Serfdom have really missed one of its main points：that the most important change which extensive government control produces is a psychological change, an alteration in the character of the people. This is necessarily a slow affair, a process which extends not over a few years but perhaps over one or two generations. The important point is that the political ideals of a people and its attitude toward authority are as much the effect as the cause of the political institutions under which it lives. This means, among other things, that even a strong tradition of political liberty is no safeguard if the danger is precisely that new institutions and policies will gradually undermine and destroy that spirit. The consequences can of course be averted if that spirit reasserts itself in time and the people not only throw out the party which has been leading them further and further in the dangerous direction but also recognize the nature of the danger and resolutely change their course. There is not yet much ground to believe that the latter has happened in England.



Yet the change undergone by the character of the British people, not merely under its Labour government but in the course of the much longer period during which it has been enjoying the blessings of a paternalistic welfare state, can hardly be mistaken. These changes are not easily demonstrated but are clearly felt if one lives in the country. In illustration, I will cite a few significant passages from a sociological survey dealing with the impact of the surfeit of regulation on the mental attitudes of the young. It is concerned with the situation before the Labour government came into power, in fact, about the time this book was first published, and deals mainly with the effects of those wartime regulations which the Labour government made permanent:



It is above all in the city that the province of the optional is felt as dwindling away to nothing. At school, in the place of work, on the journey to and fro, even in the very equipment and provisioning of the home, many of the activities normally possible to human beings are either forbidden or enjoined. Special agencies, called Citizen’s Advice Bureaus, are set up to steer the bewildered through the forest of rules, and to indicate to the persistent the rare clearings where a private person may still make a choice. . . . [The town lad] is conditioned not to lift a finger without referring mentally to the book of words first. A time-budget of an ordinary city youth for an ordinary working day would show that he spends great stretches of his waking hours going through motions that have been predetermined for him by directives in whose framing he has had no part, whose precise intention he seldom understands, and of whose appropriateness he cannot judge. . . . The inference that what the city lad needs is more discipline and tighter control is too hasty. It would be nearer the mark to say that he is suffering from an overdose of control already. . . . Surveying his parents and his older brothers or sisters he finds them as regulation bound as himself. He sees them so acclimatised to that state that they seldom plan and carry out under their own steam any new social excursion or enterprise. He thus looks forward to no future period at which a sinewy faculty of responsibility is likely to be of service to himself or others. . . . [The young people] are obliged to stomach so much external and, as it seems to them, meaningless control that they seek escape and recuperation in an absence of discipline as complete as they can make it.21



Is it too pessimistic to fear that a generation grown up under these conditions is unlikely to throw off the fetters to which it has grown used? Or does this description not rather fully bear out Tocqueville’s prediction of the “new kind of servitude” when



after having thus successively taken each member of the community in its powerful grasp, and fashioned him at will, the supreme power then extends its arm over the whole community. It covers the surface of society with a network of small complicated rules, minute and uniform, through which the most original minds and the most energetic characters cannot penetrate to rise above the crowd. The will of man is not shattered but softened, bent and guided; men are seldom forced by it to act, but they are constantly restrained from acting. Such a power does not destroy, but it prevents existence; it does not tyrannize, but it compresses, enervates, extinguishes, and stupefies a people, till each nation is reduced to be nothing better than a flock of timid and industrial animals, of which government is the shepherd.—I have always thought that servitude of the regular, quiet, and gentle kind which I have just described might be combined more easily than is commonly believed with some of the outward forms of freedom and that it might even establish itself under the wing of the sovereignty of the people.22



What Tocqueville did not consider was how long such a government would remain in the hands of benevolent despots when it would be so much more easy for any group of ruffians to keep itself indefinitely in power by disregarding all the traditional decencies of political life.



Perhaps I should also remind the reader that I have never accused the socialist parties of deliberately aiming at a totalitarian regime or even suspected that the leaders of the old socialist movements might ever show such inclinations. What I have argued in this book, and what the British experience convinces me even more to be true, is that the unforeseen but inevitable consequences of socialist planning create a state of affairs in which, if the policy is to be pursued, totalitarian forces will get the upper hand. I explicitly stress that “socialism can be put into practice only by methods of which most socialists disapprove” and even add that in this “the old socialist parties were inhibited by their democratic ideals” and that “they did not possess the ruthlessness required for the performance of their chosen task.”23 I am afraid the impression one gained under the Labour government was that these inhibitions were if anything weaker among the British socialists than they had been among their German fellow-socialists twenty-five years earlier. Certainly the German Social Democrats, in the comparable period of the 1920s, under equally or more difficult economic conditions, never approached as closely to totalitarian planning as the British Labour government has done.



Since I cannot here examine the effect of these policies in detail, I will rather quote the summary judgments of other observers who may be less suspect of preconceived opinions. Some of the most damning, in fact, come from men who not long before had themselves been members of the Labour party. Thus Mr. Ivor Thomas, in a book apparently intended to explain why he left that party, comes to the conclusion that “from the point of view of fundamental human liberties there is little to choose between communism, socialism, and national socialism. They all are examples of the collectivist or totalitarian state . . . in its essentials not only is completed socialism the same as communism but it hardly differs from fascism.”24



The most serious development is the growth of a measure of arbitrary administrative coercion and the progressive destruction of the cherished foundation of British liberty, the Rule of Law, for exactly the reasons here discussed in chapter 6. This process had of course started long before the last Labour government came into power and had been accentuated by the war. But the attempts at economic planning under the Labour government carried it to a point which makes it doubtful whether it can be said that the Rule of Law still prevails in Britain. The “New Despotism” of which a Lord Chief Justice had warned Britain as long as twenty-five years ago is, as The Economist recently observed, no longer a mere danger but an established fact.25 It is a despotism exercised by a thoroughly conscientious and honest bureaucracy for what they sincerely believe is the good of the country. But it is nevertheless an arbitrary government, in practice free from effective parliamentary control; and its machinery would be as effective for any other than the beneficent purposes for which it is now used. I doubt whether it was much exaggerated when recently an eminent British jurist, in a careful analysis of these trends, came to the conclusions that “in Britain to-day, we live on the edge of dictatorship. Transition would be easy, swift, and it could be accomplished with complete legality. Already so many steps have been taken in this direction, due to the completeness of power possessed by the Government of the day, and the absence of any real check such as the terms of a written constitution or the existence of an effective second chamber, that those still to be taken are small in comparison.”26



For a more detailed analysis of the economic policies of the British Labour government and its consequences I cannot do better than refer the reader to Professor John Jewkes’s Ordeal by Planning (London：Macmillan & Co., 1948). It is the best discussion known to me of a concrete instance of the phenomena discussed in general terms in this book. It supplements it better than anything I could add here and spells out a lesson which is of significance far beyond Great Britain.



It seems now unlikely that, even when another Labour government should come into power in Great Britain, it would resume the experiments in large-foreword scale nationalization and planning. But in Britain, as elsewhere in the world, the defeat of the onslaught of systematic socialism has merely given those who are anxious to preserve freedom a breathing space in which to re-examine our ambitions and to discard all those parts of the socialist inheritance which are a danger to a free society. Without such a revised conception of our social aims, we are likely to continue to drift in the same direction in which outright socialism would merely have carried us a little faster.



F. A. Hayek

1 [Hayek was a visiting professor in the Economics Department at the London School of Economics and Political Science (LSE) during the 1931–32 academic year, at the end of which he was appointed to the Tooke Chair of Economic Science and Statistics. The chair was founded at King’s College, London, in 1859, the year after Thomas Tooke died. In 1919 the chair was transferred from King’s to the LSE, both of which were then part of the University of London. Though Hayek’s appointment was technically with the University of London, his teaching took place at the LSE. —Ed.]



2 [Hayek refers here to “Freedom and the Economic System,” op. cit. See the preface to the original editions, note 2. —Ed.]



3 [That is, the Soviet Union. —Ed.]



4 [See my introduction to this volume, note 75, for more on this. —Ed.]



5 The most representative example of British criticism of the book from a left-wing point of view is probably Mrs. Barbara Wootton’s courteous and frank study, Freedom under Planning, op. cit. It is often quoted in the United States as an effective refutation of my argument, though I cannot help feeling that more than one reader must have gained the impression that, as one American reviewer expressed it, “it seems substantially to confirm Hayek’s thesis.” See Chester I. Barnard, “Review of Freedom under Planning,” Southern Economic Journal, vol. 12, January 1946, p. 290.



6 [Hayek visited the United States as a student from March 1923 until May 1924. —Ed.]



7 I did not know then, as has since been admitted by a person advising one of the firms, that this appears to have been due not to any doubts of the success of the book but to political prejudice, which went to the extent of representing the book as “unfit for publication by a reputable house.” See on this the statement by William Miller quoted by W. T. Couch in “The Sainted Book Burners,” The Freeman, vol. 5, April 1955, p. 423, and also William Miller, The Book Industry：A Report of the Public Library Inquiry of the Social Science Research Council (New York：Columbia University Press, 1949), p. 12. [The first printing of Miller’s book on the book industry contained the following sentence：“That university presses have done this is suggested by the publication and promotion by the University of Chicago Press a few years ago of Friedrich A. von Hayek’s The Road to Serfdom, a sensational book previously rejected by at least one notable trade house which was quite aware of its sales possibilities.” What university presses “had done” was to try to increase their profits by looking for profitable best-sellers, regardless of quality. W. T. Couch, then director of the University of Chicago Press, sent Miller a letter on October 7, 1949, stating that Miller had his facts wrong. Couch provided documentary evidence that the Press did not expect a big market for the book, and demanded a retraction of the sentence from subsequent printings of Miller’s book. In his reply to Couch, Miller acquiesced to the removal of the offending lines in subsequent printings, but also called Hayek’s book “a despicable performance” and went on to make the statements, reproduced by Couch in his article in The Freeman, that Hayek alludes to in his note. —Ed.]



8 Not a little of this was due to the publication of a condensation of this book in the Reader’s Digest, and I should like to pay here to the editors of this journal a public testimony to the extremely skillful manner in which this was done without my assistance. It is inevitable that the compression of a complex argument to a fraction of its original length produces some oversimplification, but that it was done without distortion and better than I could have done it myself is a remarkable achievement. [Hayek discusses this episode at more length in Hayek on Hayek, op. cit., 104–5; cf. my introduction to this volume, pp. 18–22. —Ed.]



9 To any reader who would like to see a specimen of abuse and invective which is probably unique in contemporary academic discussion I recommend a reading of Professor Herman Finer’s Road to Reaction, op. cit. [Hayek briefly considered filing a libel suit, and ultimately sent Finer a letter breaking off relations with him. For more on the Finer episode, see my introduction to this volume, p. 21. —Ed.]



10 [ John Emerich Edward Dalberg-Acton, First Baron Acton, “The History of Freedom in Antiquity,” reprinted in The History of Freedom and Other Essays (London：Macmillan, 1907; reprinted, Freeport, NY：Books for Libraries Press, 1967), p. 1. Lord Acton (1834–1902) was a Liberal MP from 1859 to 1864, leader of the Liberal Roman Catholics in England, and founder-editor of the Cambridge Modern History, to which he contributed the first two volumes. Hayek once thought of naming the Mont Pèlerin Society the Acton-Tocqueville Society, but Frank Knight opposed naming a liberal movement after two Catholics. The article cited was originally an address delivered to the members of the Bridgnorth Institution at the Agricultural Hall in Bridgnorth, Shropshire, on February 26, 1877. —Ed.]



11 [The National Planning Board was established within the U.S. Department of the Interior to assist in the preparation of a comprehensive plan for public works under the direction of Frederick Delano, Charles Merriam, and Wesley Clair Mitchell. Its last successor agency, the National Resources Planning Board, was abolished in 1943. —Ed.]



12 [The “eminent critic” was the economist Alvin W. Hansen (1887–1975), a leading American expositor of Keynesian economics, who as a policy advisor also played a role in the development of the social security system and the creation of the Full Employment Act of 1946. The passage Hayek cites is taken from Hansen’s review of The Road to Serfdom, “The New Crusade against Planning,” op. cit., p. 12. —Ed.]



13 The most effective of these was undoubtedly George Orwell’s 1984：A Novel (New York：New American Library, 1949). The author had earlier kindly reviewed this book. [George Orwell, pseudonym of Eric Arthur Blair (1903–1950), was an English novelist and essayist; he also wrote Animal Farm. Orwell’s brief review appeared in the Observer, April 9, 1944, together with a review of a book by Konni Zilliacus, The Mirror of the Past, Lest It Reflect the Future (London：V. Gollancz, 1944). —Ed.]



14 [For more on the distinction between conservatism and liberalism, see F. A. Hayek, “Why I Am Not a Conservative,” postscript to The Constitution of Liberty, op. cit., pp. 397–411. —Ed.]



15 F. A. Hayek, Individualism and Economic Order (Chicago：University of Chicago Press, 1948). [Among the articles reprinted in this collection are “Individualism：True and False,” “Economics and Knowledge,” “The Use of Knowledge in Society,” “The Meaning of Competition,” and three essays on socialist calculation. —Ed.]



16 F. A. Hayek, The Counter-Revolution of Science, op. cit. [The volume contains the essays “Scientism and the Study of Society,” “The Counter-Revolution of Science,” and “Comte and Hegel.” —Ed.]



17 An advance sketch of my treatment of this subject has been published by the National Bank of Egypt in the form of four lectures on The Political Ideal of the Rule of Law (Cairo：The National Bank of Egypt, 1955). [The substance of these lectures was incorporated into chapters 11 and 13– 16 of The Constitution of Liberty, op. cit. —Ed.]



18 [Economic Survey for 1947, Cmd. 7046 (London：HMSO, 1947), p. 5. —Ed.]



19 [Hayek refers to the Control of Engagement Order of 1947, issued by the Minister of Labour and, as delegated legislation, not subject to amendment by Parliament. Ivor Thomas, in The Socialist Tragedy (London：Latimer House Ltd., 1949), pp. 104–5, offered this succinct description：“Under this Order men between the ages of 18 and 50 and women between the ages of 18 and 40 may not be engaged except through an employment exchange of the Ministry of Labour, apart from certain exempted occupations. Workers in coal mining and agriculture are not permitted to leave those occupations. Other applicants at an employment exchange are offered jobs that in the Government’s view have the highest priority. If an applicant refuses to accept a job he can in the last resort be directed, and failure to obey the direction can be punished by fine or imprisonment.” —Ed.]



20 [Economic Survey for 1947, op. cit., p. 9. —Ed.]



21 L. J. Barnes, Youth Service in an English County：A Report Prepared for King George’s Jubilee Trust (London, 1945), pp. 18–21. [The first quoted passage appears on pages 18 and 20 of the report; page 19 contains a chart. The second through fourth appear on page 20, and the last on page 21. —Ed.]



22 Alexis de Tocqueville, Democracy in America, the Henry Reeve text as revised by Francis Bowen, now further corrected and edited with introduction, editorial notes, and bibliographies by Philips Bradley (New York：Alfred A. Knopf, 1945), Vol. 2, Book 4, chapter 6, p. 319. The whole chapter should be read in order to realize with what acute insight Tocqueville was able to foresee the psychological effects of the modern welfare state. It was, incidentally, Tocqueville’s frequent reference to the “new servitude” which suggested the title of the present book. [In his penetrating account of democracy in America, French historian Alexis de Tocqueville (1805–1859) observed that the search for greater equality typically is accompanied by greater centralization of government and a corresponding reduction in liberty. The chapter cited is titled, “What Sort of Despotism Democratic Nations Have to Fear.” —Ed.]



23 [Hayek quotes from The Road to Serfdom, chapter 10, p. 159. —Ed.]



24 Ivor Thomas, The Socialist Tragedy, op. cit., pp. 241, 242. [Classical scholar, author, journalist, and Labour MP Ivor Thomas (1905–1993) wrote for The Times and The News Chronicle, and later was an editor at The Daily Telegraph. He resigned from the Labour party in 1948 and subsequently joined the Conservative party. Thomas assumed the surname Bulmer-Thomas in 1952. —Ed.]



25 In an article in the issue of June 19, 1954, discussing the Report on the Public Inquiry Ordered by the Minister of Agriculture into the Disposal of Land at Crichel Down (Cmd. 9176; London：H. M. Stationery Office, 1954), a document deserving the most careful study by all those interested in the psychology of a planning bureaucracy. [The Economist article Hayek refers to is, “What Is the Public Interest?” vol. 171, June 19, 1954, pp. 951–52. The article notes how, in 1937, the Air Ministry bought against the opposition of its owners a tract of land for a bombing range. The land, part of three farms, was located in Crichel Down, Dorset. After the war the land was transferred to other government ministries and ultimately upgraded and sold to a new buyer. During the whole period the original owners tried unsuccessfully to buy or rent their land back. The episode was taken by The Economist as providing “evidence to confirm a suspicion that has been growing on the general public for some time past—that the bureaucracy in Britain has grown arrogantly careless of the rights of the subject” (p. 951). The Lord Chief Justice Hayek refers to in the text is Gordon Hewart, First Baron of Bury (1870–1943), who held the position from 1922–1940. In his book The New Despotism (London：Ernest Benn, Ltd., 1929; reprinted, Westport, CT：Greenwood Press, 1975), Hewart criticized Acts of Parliament whose provisions give broad discretion to the ministers and departments that are responsible for carrying them out, discretion that enables them to interpret the Acts as they see fit, without review or meaningful appeal, and even to amend the Acts themselves. Hewart believed that this had “the effect of placing a large and increasing field of departmental authority beyond the reach of the ordinary law” (p. 11). —Ed.]



26 G. W. Keeton, The Passing of Parliament (London：Ernest Benn Ltd., 1952), p. 33.





PREFACE TO THE 1976 EDITION



This book, written in my spare time from 1940 to 1943, while my mind was still mainly occupied with problems of pure economic theory, has unexpectedly become for me the starting point of more than thirty years’ work in a new field. This first attempt in the new direction was caused by my annoyance with the complete misinterpretation in English “progressive” circles of the character of the Nazi movement, an annoyance which led me from a memorandum to the then director of the London School of Economics, Sir William Beveridge, through an article in the Contemporary Review for 1938, which at the request of Professor Harry G. Gideonse of the University of Chicago I enlarged for publication in his Public Policy Pamphlets,1 and which, finally and reluctantly, when I found that all my more competent British colleagues were preoccupied with more urgent problems of the conduct of the war, I expanded into this tract for the times. In spite of the wholly unexpected success of the book—in the case of the initially not-contemplated American edition even greater than in that of the British one—I felt for a long time not altogether happy about it. Though I had frankly declared at the outset of the book that it was a political one, I was made to feel by most of my fellow social scientists that I had used my abilities on the wrong side, and I was myself uncomfortable about the possibility that in going beyond technical economics I might have exceeded my competence. I will not speak here about the fury which the book caused in certain circles, or of the curious difference between its reception in Great Britain and that in the United States—about that I did say something twenty years ago in the Preface to the first American paperback edition. Just to indicate the character of a widespread reaction, I will mention merely that one well-known philosopher, who shall be nameless, wrote to another to reproach him for having lauded this scandalous book, which “of course [he] had not read”!2



But though I tried hard to get back to economics proper, I could not free myself of the feeling that the problems on which I had so undesignedly embarked were more challenging and important than those of economic theory, and that much that I had said in my first sketch needed clarification and elaboration. When I wrote the book, I had by no means sufficiently freed myself from all the prejudices and superstitions dominating general opinion, and even less had I learned to avoid all the prevalent confusions of terms and concepts of which I have since become very conscious. And the discussion of the consequences of socialist policies which the book attempts is of course not complete without an adequate account of what an appropriately run market order requires and can achieve. It was to the latter problem that the further work I have since done in the field was mainly devoted. The first result of these efforts of explaining the nature of an order of freedom was a substantial book called The Constitution of Liberty (1960) in which I essentially attempted to restate and make more coherent the doctrines of classical nineteenth-century liberalism. The awareness that such a restatement left certain important questions unanswered led me then to a further effort to provide my own answers in a work of three volumes entitled Law, Legislation, and Liberty, of which the first volume appeared in 1973.3



In the last twenty years, I have, I believe, learned much about the problems discussed in this book, though I don’t think I ever reread the book during this time. Having done so now for the purpose of this Preface, I feel no longer apologetic, but for the first time am rather proud of it—and not least of the insight which made me dedicate it “To the Socialists of All Parties.” Indeed, though I have in the interval learned much that I did not know when I wrote it, I was now often surprised by how much I did already see at the beginning of my efforts that later work has confirmed; and though my later efforts will, I hope, be more rewarding to the expert, I am now prepared unhesitatingly to recommend this early book to the general reader who wants a simple and nontechnical introduction to what I believe is still one of the most ominous questions which we have to solve.



The reader will probably ask whether this means that I am still prepared to defend all the main conclusions of this book, and the answer to this is on the whole affirmative. The most important qualification I must add is that during the interval of time terminology has changed and for this reason what I say in the book may be misunderstood. At the time I wrote, socialism meant unambiguously the nationalization of the means of production and the central economic planning which this made possible and necessary. In this sense Sweden, for instance, is today very much less socialistically organized than Great Britain or Austria, though Sweden is commonly regarded as much more socialistic. This is due to the fact that socialism has come to mean chiefly the extensive redistribution of incomes through taxation and the institutions of the welfare state. In the latter kind of socialism the effects I discuss in this book are brought about more slowly, indirectly, and imperfectly. I believe that the ultimate outcome tends to be very much the same, although the process by which it is brought about is not quite the same as that described in this book.



It has frequently been alleged that I have contended that any movement in the direction of socialism is bound to lead to totalitarianism. Even though this danger exists, this is not what the book says. What it contains is a warning that unless we mend the principles of our policy, some very unpleasant consequences will follow which most of those who advocate these policies do not want.



Where I now feel I was wrong in this book is chiefly in that I rather under-stressed the significance of the experience of communism in Russia—a fault which is perhaps pardonable when it is remembered that when I wrote, Russia was our wartime ally—and that I had not wholly freed myself from all the current interventionist superstitions, and in consequence still made various concessions which I now think unwarranted. And I certainly was not yet fully aware how bad things already were in some respects. I still regarded it, for example, as a rhetorical question when I asked, If Hitler had obtained his unlimited powers in a strictly constitutional manner, “who would suggest that the Rule of Law still prevailed in Germany?” only to discover later that professors Hans Kelsen and Harold J. Laski, and probably many other socialist lawyers and political scientists following these influential authors, had maintained precisely this.4 Quite generally, further study of the contemporary trends of thought and institutions has, if anything, increased my alarm and concern. And both the influence of socialist ideas and the naïve trust in the good intentions of the holders of totalitarian power have markedly increased since I wrote this book.



I have long resented being more widely known by what I regarded as a pamphlet for the time than by my strictly scientific work. After reexamining what I wrote then in the light of some thirty years’ further study of the problems then raised, I no longer do so. Though the book may contain much that I could not, when I wrote it, have convincingly demonstrated, it was a genuine effort to find the truth which I believe has produced insights that will help even those who disagree with me to avoid grave dangers.



F. A. Hayek

1 [See the preface to the original editions, note 2. —Ed.]



2 [The nameless philosopher was the positivist Rudolf Carnap; for the full quotation, see my introduction to this volume, p. 2. —Ed.]



3 [The second and third volumes appeared in 1976 and 1979 respectively. See F. A. Hayek, The Mirage of Social Justice, vol. 2 (1976), and The Political Order of a Free People, vol. 3 (1979) of Law, Legislation, and Liberty, op. cit. —Ed.]



4 [English political scientist Harold J. Laski (1893–1950) was a colleague of Hayek’s at the LSE and, prior to the Molotov-Ribbentrop nonaggression pact, an avid defender of Stalin and his policies. Hayek remarks on Laski’s “pathological” proclivity toward prevarication in Hayek on Hayek, op. cit., p. 82. Austrian-born legal theorist Hans Kelsen (1881–1973) taught at Vienna, Cologne, and ultimately at the University of California-Berkeley. Kelsen developed the “pure theory of law” and was known for his defense of legal positivism. —Ed.]





INTRODUCTION



Few discoveries are more irritating than those which expose the pedigree of ideas. —Lord Acton1



Contemporary events differ from history in that we do not know the results they will produce. Looking back, we can assess the significance of past occurrences and trace the consequences they have brought in their train. But while history runs its course, it is not history to us. It leads us into an unknown land, and but rarely can we get a glimpse of what lies ahead. It would be different if it were given to us to live a second time through the same events with all the knowledge of what we have seen before. How different would things appear to us; how important and often alarming would changes seem that we now scarcely notice! It is probably fortunate that man can never have this experience and knows of no laws which history must obey.



Yet, although history never quite repeats itself, and just because no development is inevitable, we can in a measure learn from the past to avoid a repetition of the same process. One need not be a prophet to be aware of impending dangers. An accidental combination of experience and interest will often reveal events to one man under aspects which few yet see.



The following pages are the product of an experience as near as possible to twice living through the same period—or at least twice watching a very similar evolution of ideas. While this is an experience one is not likely to gain in one country, it may in certain circumstance be acquired by living in turn for long periods in different countries. Though the influences to which the trend of thought is subject in most civilized nations are to a large extent similar, they do not necessarily operate at the same time or at the same speed. Thus, by moving from one country to another, one may sometimes twice watch similar phases of intellectual development. The senses have then become peculiarly acute. When one hears for a second time opinions expressed or measures advocated which one has first met twenty or twenty-five years ago, they assume a new meaning as symptoms of a definite trend.2 They suggest, if not the necessity, at least the probability, that developments will take a similar course.



It is necessary now to state the unpalatable truth that it is Germany whose fate we are in some danger of repeating. The danger is not immediate, it is true, and conditions in England and the United States are still so remote from those witnessed in recent years in Germany as to make it difficult to believe that we are moving in the same direction. Yet, though the road be long, it is one on which it becomes more difficult to turn back as one advances. If in the long run we are the makers of our own fate, in the short run we are the captives of the ideas we have created. Only if we recognize the danger in time can we hope to avert it.



It is not to the Germany of Hitler, the Germany of the present war, that England and the United States bear yet any resemblance. But students of the currents of ideas can hardly fail to see that there is more than a superficial similarity between the trend of thought in Germany during and after the last war and the present current of ideas in the democracies. There exists now in these countries certainly the same determination that the organization of the nation which has been achieved for purposes of defense shall be retained for the purposes of creation. There is the same contempt for nineteenth-century liberalism, the same spurious “realism” and even cynicism, the same fatalistic acceptance of “inevitable trends.” And at least nine out of every ten of the lessons which our most vociferous reformers are so anxious we should learn from this war are precisely the lessons which the Germans did learn from the last war and which have done much to produce the Nazi system. We shall have opportunity in the course of this book to show that there are a large number of other points where at an interval of fifteen to twenty-five years we seem to follow the example of Germany. Although one does not like to be reminded, it is not so many years since the socialist policy of that country was generally held up by progressives as an example to be imitated, just as in more recent years Sweden has been the model country to which progressive eyes were directed. All those whose memory goes further back know how deeply for at least a generation before the last war German thought and German practice influenced ideals and policy in England and, to some extent, in the United States.



The author has spent about half of his adult life in his native Austria, in close touch with German intellectual life, and the other half in the United States and England. In the latter period he has become increasingly convinced that at least some of the forces which have destroyed freedom in Germany are also at work here and that the character and the source of this danger are, if possible, even less understood than they were in Germany. The supreme tragedy is still not seen that in Germany it was largely people of good will, men who were admired and held up as models in the democratic countries, who prepared the way for, if they did not actually create, the forces which now stand for everything they detest. Yet our chance of averting a similar fate depends on our facing the danger and on our being prepared to revise even our most cherished hopes and ambitions if they should prove to be the source of the danger. There are few signs yet that we have the intellectual courage to admit to ourselves that we may have been wrong. Few are ready to recognize that the rise of fascism and naziism was not a reaction against the socialist trends of the preceding period but a necessary outcome of those tendencies. This is a truth which most people were unwilling to see even when the similarities of many of the repellent features of the internal regimes in communist Russia and National Socialist Germany were widely recognized. As a result, many who think themselves infinitely superior to the aberrations of naziism, and sincerely hate all its manifestations, work at the same time for ideals whose realization would lead straight to the abhorred tyranny.



All parallels between developments in different countries are, of course, deceptive; but I am not basing my argument mainly on such parallels. Nor am I arguing that these developments are inevitable. If they were, there would be no point in writing this. They can be prevented if people realize in time where their efforts may lead. But until recently there was little hope that any attempt to make them see the danger would be successful. It seems, however, as if the time were now ripe for a fuller discussion of the whole issue. Not only is the problem now more widely recognized; there are also special reasons which at this juncture make it imperative that we should face the issues squarely.



It will, perhaps, be said that this is not the time to raise an issue on which opinions clash sharply. But the socialism of which we speak is not a party matter, and the questions which we are discussing have little to do with the questions at dispute between political parties. It does not affect our problem that some groups may want less socialism than others; that some want socialism mainly in the interest of one group and others in that of another. The important point is that, if we take the people whose views influence developments, they are now in the democracies in some measure all socialists. If it is no longer fashionable to emphasize that “we are all socialists now,” this is so merely because the fact is too obvious.3 Scarcely anybody doubts that we must continue to move toward socialism, and most people are merely trying to deflect this movement in the interest of a particular class or group.



It is because nearly everybody wants it that we are moving in this direction. There are no objective facts which make it inevitable. We shall have to say something about the alleged inevitability of “planning” later. The main question is where this movement will lead us. Is it not possible that if the people whose convictions now give it an irresistible momentum began to see what only a few yet apprehend, they would recoil in horror and abandon the quest which for half a century has engaged so many people of good will? Where these common beliefs of our generation will lead us is a problem not for one party but for every one of us—a problem of the most momentous significance. Is there a greater tragedy imaginable than that, in our endeavor consciously to shape our future in accordance with high ideals, we should in fact unwittingly produce the very opposite of what we have been striving for?



There is an even more pressing reason why at this time we should seriously endeavor to understand the forces which have created National Socialism：that this will enable us to understand our enemy and the issue at stake between us. It cannot be denied that there is yet little recognition of the positive ideals for which we are fighting. We know that we are fighting for freedom to shape our life according to our own ideas. That is a great deal, but not enough. It is not enough to give us the firm beliefs which we need to resist an enemy who uses propaganda as one of his main weapons not only in the most blatant but also in the most subtle forms. It is still more insufficient when we have to counter this propaganda among the people in the countries under his control and elsewhere, where the effect of this propaganda will not disappear with the defeat of the Axis powers. It is not enough if we are to show to others that what we are fighting for is worth their support, and it is not enough to guide us in the building of a new world safe against the dangers to which the old one has succumbed.



It is a lamentable fact that the democracies in their dealings with the dictators before the war, not less than in their attempts at propaganda and in the discussion of their war aims, have shown an inner insecurity and uncertainty of aim which can be explained only by confusion about their own ideals and the nature of the differences which separated them from the enemy. We have been misled as much because we have refused to believe that the enemy was sincere in the profession of some beliefs which we shared as because we believed in the sincerity of some of his other claims. Have not the parties of the Left as well as those of the Right been deceived by believing that the National Socialist party was in the service of the capitalists and opposed to all forms of socialism? How many features of Hitler’s system have not been recommended to us for imitation from the most unexpected quarters, unaware that they are an integral part of that system and incompatible with the free society we hope to preserve? The number of dangerous mistakes we have made before and since the outbreak of war because we do not understand the opponent with whom we are faced is appalling. It seems almost as if we did not want to understand the development which has produced totalitarianism because such an understanding might destroy some of the dearest illusions to which we are determined to cling.



We shall never be successful in our dealings with the Germans until we understand the character and the growth of the ideas which now govern them. The theory which is once again put forth, that the Germans as such are inherently vicious, is hardly tenable and not very creditable to those who hold it. It dishonors the long series of Anglo-Saxon thinkers who during the last hundred years have gladly taken over what was best, and not only what was best, in German thought. It overlooks the fact that, when eighty years ago John Stuart Mill was writing his great essay On Liberty, he drew his inspiration, more than from any other men, from two Germans—Goethe and Wilhelm von Humboldt— and forgets the fact that two of the most influential intellectual forebears of National Socialism—Thomas Carlyle and Houston Stewart Chamberlain— were a Scot and an Englishman.4 In its cruder forms this view is a disgrace to those who by maintaining it adopt the worst features of German racial theories.



The problem is not why the Germans as such are vicious, which congenitally they are probably no more than other peoples, but to determine the circumstances which during the last seventy years have made possible the progressive growth and the ultimate victory of a particular set of ideas, and why in the end this victory has brought the most vicious elements among them to the top. Mere hatred of everything German instead of the particular ideas which now dominate the Germans is, moreover, very dangerous, because it blinds those who indulge in it against a real threat. It is to be feared that this attitude is frequently merely a kind of escapism, caused by an unwillingness to recognize tendencies which are not confined to Germany and by a reluctance to re-examine, and if necessary to discard, beliefs which we have taken over from the Germans and by which we are still as much deluded as the Germans were. It is doubly dangerous because the contention that only the peculiar wickedness of the Germans has produced the Nazi system is likely to become the excuse for forcing on us the very institutions which have produced that wickedness.



The interpretation of the developments in Germany and Italy about to be proffered in this book is very different from that given by most foreign observers and by the majority of exiles from those countries. But if this interpretation is correct, it will also explain why it is almost impossible for a person who, like most of the exiles and the foreign correspondents of English and American newspapers, holds the now prevalent socialist views to see those events in the proper perspective. The superficial and misleading view which sees in National Socialism merely a reaction fomented by those whose privileges or interests were threatened by the advance of socialism was naturally supported by all those who, although they were at one time active in the movement of ideas that has led to National Socialism, have stopped at some point of that development and, by the conflict into which this brought them with the Nazis, were forced to leave their country. But the fact that they were numerically the only significant opposition to the Nazis means no more than that in the wider sense practically all Germans had become socialists and that liberalism in the old sense had been driven out by socialism. As we hope to show, the conflict in existence between the National Socialist “Right” and the “Left” in Germany is the kind of conflict that will always arise between rival socialist factions. If this interpretation is correct, it means, however, that many of those socialist refugees, in clinging to their beliefs, are now, though with the best will in the world, helping to lead their adopted country the way which Germany has gone.



I know that many of my Anglo-Saxon friends have sometimes been shocked by the semi-Fascist views they would occasionally hear expressed by German refugees, whose genuinely socialist convictions could not be doubted. But while these observers put this down to the others’ being Germans, the true explanation is that they were socialists whose experience had carried them several stages beyond that yet reached by socialists in England and America. It is true, of course, that German socialists have found much support in their country from certain features of the Prussian tradition; and this kinship between Prussianism and socialism, in which in Germany both sides gloried, gives additional support to our main contention.5 But it would be a mistake to believe that the specific German rather than the socialist element produced totalitarianism. It was the prevalence of socialist views and not Prussianism that Germany had in common with Italy and Russia—and it was from the masses and not from the classes steeped in the Prussian tradition, and favored by it, that National Socialism arose.



1 [Lord Acton, “Review of Sir Erskine May’s Democracy in Europe” [1878], reprinted in The History of Freedom and Other Essays, op. cit., p. 62. —Ed.]



2 [Hayek alludes here to the trends he identified in his inaugural lecture at the LSE, “The Trend of Economic Thinking,” op. cit. —Ed.]



3 [The nineteenth century Liberal statesman Sir William Vernon Harcourt (1827–1904) originated the phrase, “We are all socialists now.” —Ed.]



4 As some people may think this statement exaggerated, the testimony of Lord Morley may be worth quoting, who in his Recollections speaks of the “acknowledged point” that the main argument of the essay On Liberty “was not original but came from Germany.” [Hayek quotes from John, Viscount Morley, Recollections, vol. 1 (New York：Macmillan, 1917), pp. 61–62. John Morley, First Viscount Morley of Blackburn (1838–1923), was an English statesman and man of letters. He wrote numerous biographies, the most famous of them a four volume work on William Gladstone. German poet, playwright, and scientist Johann Wolfgang von Goethe (1749–1832) was the author of Faust and The Sorrows of Young Werther. Philologist and statesman Karl Wilhelm von Humboldt (1767–1835) was the first Prussian minister of education and founder of the University of Berlin. Essayist and man of letters Thomas Carlyle (1795–1881), who through various publications helped introduce German culture and literature to English readers, is best known among economists for dubbing the classicals “the dreary professors of a dismal science.” English-born author and propagandist Houston Stewart Chamberlain (1855–1927) who lived in Germany from 1885 and who wrote principally on music and philosophy, was known for his support for the doctrine of Aryan supremacy. Hayek’s note originally was placed after the name “Humboldt.” —Ed.]



5 That there did exist a certain kinship between socialism and the organization of the Prussian state, consciously organized from the top as in no other country, is undeniable and was freely recognized already by the early French socialists. Long before the ideal of running the whole state on the same principles as a single factory was to inspire nineteenth-century socialism, the Prussian poet Novalis had already deplored that “no other state has ever been administered so much like a factory as Prussia since the death of Frederick William,” in Novalis, Glauben und Liebe, oder der König and die Königin [1798] [The cited passage may be found in Novalis, Schriften, vol. 2 (Stuttgart：Verlag W. Kohlhammer, 1981, p. 494), and reads “Kein Staat ist mehr als Fabrik verwaltet worden, als Preußen, seit Friedrich Wilhelm des Ersten Tode.” Novalis was the pen name of the Prussian poet and novelist Friedrich von Hardenberg (1772–1801), known as the “Prophet of Romanticism.” The work from which Hayek quotes may be translated as Faith and Love, or the King and the Queen. Novalis anticipated there a future in which universal human spirituality would eliminate the need for government. —Ed.]






