Acknowledgments



I would like to thank the staff of the Interlibrary Loan department at Jackson Library, UNC-Greensboro, for obtaining scores of books and articles for me to use, and reference librarian Mark Schumacher for his assistance in tracking down a number of Hayek’s more obscure references. A number of individuals also helped me in this latter task, among them Jack Bladel, Valerie Cauchemez, Andrew Farrant, Wendula Gräfin v. Klinckowstroem, Rob Leonard, Harro Maas, Chris Tame, Yuri Tulupenko, Viktor Vanberg, and John Webb. Donald Moggridge corrected some errors in my introduction. Karl Schleunes, Dave Limburg, and Tim Williams assisted me with the translation of certain German phrases. Jude Blanchett at the Foundation for Economic Education provided me with the interesting 1945 article by Croswell Bowen on the “selling” of The Road to Serfdom. Finally, I thank John Blundell, Stephen Kresge, and Stuart Warner for many conversations about Hayek, and for their good advice about the volume.



I owe a special debt to Susan Howson for bringing to my attention the memo by Hayek found in the William Beveridge papers, for providing me with the LSE schedule of classes for the 1930s, and for alerting me to the correspondence between Hayek and Machlup in the Machlup collection, which is much more extensive than that in the Hayek collection.



I presented versions of my introduction at the Duke University Workshop in Political Economy, at a conference on neoliberalism at New York University, at the UK History of Thought Conference, and at meetings of the History of Economics Society and the History of Economic Thought Society of Australia, and greatly benefited from the comments of participants. Two anonymous readers for the University of Chicago Press caught a number of errors and made suggestions for strengthening the manuscript.



A number of people at the University of Chicago Press assisted me in the preparation of this volume. Catherine Beebe helped me find materials in the University archives, and my editor Alex Schwartz helped in innumerable ways to get the project to completion.



The last time I saw Hayek’s son Laurence was at a conference at Kings College, Cambridge, in June 2004 to commemorate the sixtieth anniversary of the publication of The Road to Serfdom. At the end of the conference we took a tour to the top of Kings Chapel to see where Hayek and John Clapham had once done air raid duty during the war. Laurence had been a student at Kings and clearly relished reliving his own earlier clandestine visits to the chapel roof. Only three weeks later, on July 15, 2004, Laurence Hayek died at home of a heart attack. This volume is dedicated to his memory.



Bruce Caldwell



