Bibliographical Note



The exposition of a point of view which for many years has been decidedly out of favor suffers from the difficulty that, within the compass of a few chapters, it is not possible to discuss more than some aspects of it. For the reader whose outlook has been formed entirely by the views that have been dominant during the last twenty years this will scarcely be sufficient to provide the common ground required for profitable discussion. But although unfashionable, the views of the author of the present book are not so singular as they may appear to some readers. His basic outlook is the same as that of a steadily growing number of writers in many countries whose studies have led them independently to similar conclusions. The reader who would like to acquaint himself further with what he may have found an unfamiliar but not uncongenial climate of opinion may find useful the following list of some of the more important works of this kind, including several in which the essentially critical character of the present essay is supplemented by a fuller discussion of the structure of a desirable future society. The earliest and still the most important of these works is that by von Mises, originally published in 1922.



Cassel, Gustav. From Protectionism through Planned Economy to Dictatorship. Cobden Memorial Lecture, London：Cobden-Sanderson, 1934.

Chamberlin, William H. A False Utopia：Collectivism in Theory and Practice. London：Duck-worth, 1937.

Graham, Frank D. Social Goals and Economic Institutions. Princeton：Princeton University Press, 1942.

Gregory, T. E. Gold, Unemployment, and Capitalism. London：P. S. King and Son, 1933.

Halévy, Élie. L’ère des tyrannies：Études sur le socialisme et la guerre. (Paris：Gallimard, 1938). (English versions of two of the most important essays in this volume will be found in Economica, February, 1941, and in International Affairs, 1934.)¹

Hayek, F. A., ed. Collectivist Economic Planning：Critical Studies on the Possibilities of Socialism. London：Routledge, 1935.

Hutt, W. H. Economists and the Public：A Study of Competition and Opinion. London：Cape, 1936.

Lippmann, Walter. An Inquiry into the Principles of the Good Society. London：Allen & Unwin, 1937.

Mises, Ludwig von. Socialism：An Economic and Sociological Analysis, translated by Jacques Kahane, London：Cape, 1936.

———. Omnipotent Government：The Rise of the Total State and Total War. New Haven：Yale University Press, 1944.

Muir, Ramsay. Civilization and Liberty. London：Cape, 1940.

Polanyi, Michael. The Contempt of Freedom：The Russian Experiment and After. London：Watts and Co., 1940.

Queeny, Edgar M. The Spirit of Enterprise. New York：Scribner’s, 1943.

Rappard, William. The Crisis of Democracy. Chicago：University of Chicago Press, 1938.

Robbins, Lionel. Economic Planning and International Order. London：Macmillan, 1937.

———. The Economic Basis of Class Conflict and Other Essays in Political Economy. London：Macmillan, 1939.

———. The Economic Causes of War. London：Cape, 1939.

Roepke, Wilhelm. Die Gesellschaftskrisis der Gegenwart. Zürich：Eugen Rentsch, 1942.

———. Civitas Humana. Zurich：Eugen Rentsch, 1944.

Rougier, Louis. Les mystiques économiques：comment l’on passe des démocraties libérales aux états totalitaires. Paris：Librairie de Médicis, 1938.

Voigt, Fritz. Unto Caesar. London：Constable, 1938.

The following of the “Public Policy Pamphlets” published by the University of Chicago Press:



Simons, Henry. A Positive Program for Laissez Faire：Some Proposals for a Liberal Economic Policy. Public Policy Pamphlet no. 15. Chicago：University of Chicago Press, 1934.

Gideonse, Harry D. Organized Scarcity and Public Policy：Monopoly and Its Implications. Public Policy Pamphlet no. 30. Chicago：University of Chicago Press, 1939.

Hermens, Ferdinand. Democracy and Proportional Representation. Public Policy Pamphlet no. 31. Chicago：University of Chicago Press, 1940.

Sulzbach, Walter. “Capitalistic Warmongers”：A Modern Superstition. Public Policy Pamphlet no. 35. Chicago：University of Chicago Press, 1942.

Heilperin, Michael A. Economic Policy and Democracy. Public Policy Pamphlet no. 37. Chicago：University of Chicago Press, 1943.

There are also important German and Italian works of a similar character which, in consideration for their authors, it would be unwise at present to mention by name.



To this list I add the titles of three books which more than any others known to me help one to understand the system of ideas ruling our enemies and the differences which separate their minds from ours,



Ashton, E. B. The Fascist：His State and Mind. London：Putnam, 1937.



Foerster, Friedrich W. Europe and the German Question. London：Sheed and Ward, 1940.



Kantorowicz, H. The Spirit of British Policy and the Myth of the Encirclement of Germany. New York：Oxford University Press, 1932.

and that of a remarkable recent work on the modern history of Germany which is not so well known abroad as it deserves:



Schnabel, Franz. Deutsche Geschichte im 19. Jahrhundert. ⁴ vols. Freiburg im Breisgau, 1929–37.

Perhaps the best guides through some of our contemporary problems will still be found in the works of some of the great political philosophers of the liberal age, Tocque-ville or Lord Acton, and, to go even further back, Benjamin Constant, Edmund Burke, and The Federalist papers of Madison, Hamilton, and Jay—generations to whom liberty was still a problem and a value to be defended, where ours at the same time takes it for granted and neither realizes whence the danger threatens nor has the courage to emancipate itself from the doctrines which endanger it.

¹ [Hayek refers here to Élie Halévy, “The Age of Tyrannies” (trans. May Wallas), Economica, N.S., vol. 4, February 1941, pp. 77–93, and Élie Halévy, “Socialism and the Problem of Democratic Parliamentarianism,” International Affairs, vol. 13, July–August 1934, pp. 490–507. —Ed.]





